A pig is a passive mob found commonly in most grass biomes, though they also can also spawn in the Taiga biomes, the Badlands, Savanna, and Jungle biomes with seperate variants. Pigs are a source of porkchops and can be equipped with a saddle to be driven.

In Java Edition, pigs spawn in groups of 4 above grass blocks at a light level of 9 or more in any grassy Overworld biome except in snowy plains, and meadows. Individual pigs rarely may spawn on grass after the world generation. In Bedrock Edition, pigs spawn in groups of 1 to 3 above grass blocks at a light level of 7 or more in any grassy Overworld biome except in snowy plains, meadows and wooded badlands plateaus. Individuals regularly spawn on grass after the world generation.
Pigs spawn in animal pens, stables and in butcher house backyards in villages. 95% of pigs spawn as adults and 5% of pigs spawn as piglets. Pigs cannot spawn naturally with a saddle.

An adult pig drops upon death:

From 1 to 3 raw porkchop or cooked porkchop if killed while on fire. The maximum amount is increased by 1 per level of Looting, for a maximum of 1-6 with Looting III.
A saddle if saddled.
13 experience orbs if killed by a player or tamed wolf.
17 orbs upon breeding.
Killing a piglet yields no items nor experience.

Pigs roam the Overworld avoiding hazards and harmful falls while snorting occasionally. A pig flees for a short time when harmed.
When a pig or piglet is struck by lightning, it transforms into a zombified piglin or baby zombified piglin, respectively. If the pig was equipped with a saddle, the saddle is lost and the player dismounts. If lightning strikes a pig in Peaceful difficulty, the pig does not transform but takes normal damage from the strike.

It is possible to ride an adult pig by using a saddle on it. When a saddle is used on a pig, the pig might stare at the player for a few seconds. Saddled pigs are controllable with a carrot on a stick. They start slow but accelerate to 5.20 blocks/s. Piglets cannot be saddled nor ridden.
Pig cannot float on water when being controlled. Pigs can be controlled through 1-block-high bodies of water with a carrot and stick, but deeper water causes the player to dismount. Using the carrot on a stick while riding a pig makes it run faster at the cost of 7 durability. If the pig and rider fall, then fall damage doesn't cause any knockback or slower movement speed.
A player can travel through a space 1 block high by riding a pig. 

Pigs follow players within six blocks using carrots, potatoes, beetroots or carrots on a stick. Pigs can be bred using carrots, potatoes or beetroots. After breeding, the parents have a cooldown of 5 minutes before they can breed again. Piglets mature in 20 minutes and stay near their parents. Feeding them reduces the remaining time to maturity by 10%. Baby pigs whose parents are mixed (temperate and cold, temperate and warm, warm and cold) variants will have their variant randomly picked from one of their parents, and will not be decided by which biome they reside in.

In Java Edition (as of snapshot 25w02a), pigs can spawn in 3 different variants (breeds):

Temperate pigs, which were the only variant existing before 25w02a.
Cold pigs, which spawn in Old Growth Pine Taigas, Old Growth Spruce Taigas, Taigas, Snowy Taigas, Windswept Hills, Windswept Gravelly Hills, and Windswept Forests.
Warm pigs, which spawn in Savannas, Savanna Plateaus, Windswept Savannas, Jungles, Sparse Jungles, Bamboo Jungles, Eroded Badlands, Wooded Badlands, and Badlands.

Java Edition:
Pigs use the Friendly Creatures sound category for entity-dependent sound events.

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Pigs have entity data associated with them that contain various properties.
Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

See Bedrock Edition level format/Entity format.

Issues relating to "Pig" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

A pig appears as a DLC costume for the Mii Brawler in the crossover fighting game Super Smash Bros. Ultimate.
The 2017 game Fire Pro Wrestling World contains the Minecraft pig texture in its files. However, the texture is not used in-game.
In the 1.19 promotional artwork there is a pig with a crown. This is a tribute to a deceased Minecraft Youtuber, Technoblade.
Similarly, there's a pig wearing a crown in a brief scene in A Minecraft Movie, which Steve calls it "a legend".