A vanguard is an undead hostile skeleton variant that can be found within the various missions of Minecraft Dungeons.

Vanguards are seen wearing vanguard armor, a leather belt around its waist, and an iron helmet with a brown stripe wrapped around it near the base which is thought to tie the gold stun on the helmet.

Missions
Desert Temple
Lower Temple
Dingy Jungle (Secret area)
Overgrown Temple
Panda Plateau
Lone Fortress
Abyssal Monument (Secret area)
The Stronghold
Daily Trial
Tower
Treetop Tangle
Mobs
Nameless One

Vanguards have two behaviors.

Walk
Vanguards immediately chase after the hero once seen or alerted by another mob.

Attack
Vanguards stab the target with its glaive (which make vanguards melee attackers) when close enough. The shield serves as extra health as it absorbs the first attack. Vanguards have a longer attack reach than most other mobs, meaning that they can hit targets from farther away. The long attack reach also allows them to take down targets more easily, such as wolves.

Vanguard armor is an armor set that is exclusively equipped by vanguards within the various missions of Minecraft Dungeons.

The chest plate covers half of the rib cage, extending to the back and around the arms.

A desert shield is a shield that is exclusively equipped by vanguards within the various missions of Minecraft Dungeons.

Desert shields provide vanguards some protection against attacks, They do not deflect all ranged attacks. This is unlike Tower guards shields wielded by tower guards.

The cursed presence is an ancient vanguard that can be encountered during ancient hunts with the minimum offering of the following runes:

The ancient resides within a Lower Temple-themed arena and possesses, at minimum, the following enchantments:

Chilling
Gravity Pulse
Poison Cloud
Fifteen enchanted baby zombies act as the ancient's minions, possessing the following enchantments:

Burning
Upon defeating the cursed presence, a gilded variant of the following items drops as a reward:

Cutlass
Dancer's Sword
Nameless Blade
Phantom Armor
Frost Bite
Soul Crossbow
Feral Soul Crossbow
Voidcaller

In the game files, vanguards are referred to internally by the name SkeletonVanguard.
In the game files, vanguard armor is referred to internally by the name DesertArmor.
In the game files, desert shields are referred to internally by the name desertShield.

Issues relating to "Vanguard" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.