The enchanted flint and steel (a.k.a. glowing flint and steel or portal key) is a Minecraft: Story Mode exclusive variant of the flint and steel.

The enchanted flint and steels are known to be nearly identical to their normal counterpart. However, the enchanted variants are glowing an abnormal color, light blue and lime.

When struck, it can activate portals to other worlds or the portal network and be used to create unique three block-high blue flames.

In "Order Up!", Jesse finds a set of cyan enchanted flint and steel in a chest in the Temple of the Old Builders.
It can later be used to activate a portal to Sky City, and then re-used to ignite the other half of the portal.
In "A Portal to Mystery", The White Pumpkin attempts to kill Jesse's Gang and the YouTubers to try to search for the enchanted flint and steel.
Stampy Cat is also revealed to have stolen a similar set of flint and steel with lime-green color from DanTDM.
In "Access Denied", when leaving Crown Mesa, Jesse uses the cyan set to activate the Crown Mesa Portal leading to The Portal Network.
In "A Journey's End?", Jesse can choose to show the cyan enchanted flint and steel to the Old Builders, which makes them mention castles filled with chests of them.
In the Lava Race, if Jesse doesn't save Nell, he/she will use the cyan set to attack Emily.
After Jesse's gang return to their home world, Jesse places the cyan set on a pedestal in the Order Hall before it is later taken by Ivor.

The Old Builders (Created)
Jesse
Aiden (Temporarily)
TheDiamondMinecart (Formerly)
Stampy Cat
The White Pumpkin / Cassie Rose (Temporarily)
Ivor

In "Order Up!", Jesse will always find the enchanted flint and steel inside the Temple of the Old Builders regardless of which chest he/she chooses to open.
The color of the cyan enchanted flint and steel appears to resemble diamond, while the color of the green set appears to resemble emerald.
The green enchanted flint and steel could possibly light a green flame.
It is unknown if there was a separate set planned for Crown Mesa from "Access Denied". If so, it would most likely be a red one resembling redstone and would possibly light a red flame.
In Minecraft, it is possible to enchant regular flint and steel with the Unbreaking and Mending enchantments, however, this is not the same as the enchanted flint and steels found in Minecraft: Story Mode, as mentioned by Olivia.
It was confirmed by Hadrian (determinant) that The Old Builders own chests full of enchanted flint and steels, possibly one for each portal in the Portal Network.
In the 1.16 Nether Update for Minecraft added soul fire which bears resemblance to the enchanted flint & steel's fire. This is most likely just a coincidence.