Armor is an equipable gear in Minecraft: Story Mode and Minecraft: Story Mode - Season Two.

There are five different types of armor that are present in both Minecraft and Minecraft: Story Mode:

Iron boots, crafted by Jesse in Build Club, which then get equipped by Milo. (determinant)
Leather pants dropped from the TorqueDawg's inventory.
Iron chestplate, which Jesse wore before going down in the mineshaft, which got destroyed by Lluna.
Suits of armor that are seen on display in Jack and Nurm's Adventure Emporium.
Leather tunic and pants from Sammy's remains.

Gabriel wears navy colored armor studded with diamonds.
Ellegaard wears brown, gold and red armor along with goggles.
Magnus wears green and brown armor along with an astronught helmet and an eyepiece.
Soren wears tan, black and silver armor along with a hat.
Ivor was shown donning gold and navy blue armor in a flashback from Episode 1. He was also shown wearing it in the Adventure Pass thumbnail, excluding the helmet.

Ivor kept eight sets of armor in his laboratory in the far lands which he had enchanted for the order. They each had special functions.

Golden Goliath  "Very strong and powerful armor with the power of the Sun."
Redstone Riot  "Indestructible armor engineered using Redstone."
Ender Defender  "Strong against Endermen."
Swordbreaker  "Cannot be pierced using a sword."
Shield of Infinity  "Everlasting, powerful armor."
Dragonsbane  "Strong against Dragon creatures, such as the Ender Dragon."
Star Shield  "Strong armor which nothing in the universe can pierce."
Adamantine Impervium  "Strong armor which cannot be damaged and cannot lose durability, Ivor humorously saying it is "even harder to damage than it is to pronounce!"
There are also four unnamed Ivor's enchanted armor sets which are used by Petra, Lukas, Olivia, and Axel:

Petra wears blue and gold armor.
Lukas wears orange, gray, and black armor with goggles.
Axel wears a glass helmet, similar to Magnus, along with gloves, a chestplate, and boots.
Olivia wears red and gold armor with goggles, similar to the goggles worn by Ellegaard.

The Old Builders kept a set of armor in the Hadrian's palace, claiming that it once belonged to the famous competitor called Tim. It was a strong set of armor.

In "Below the Bedrock", Binta provides a set of sleeping garments to the winner of the trivia contest. The garments resemble Fred's outfit. If Jesse wins the contest and chooses to wear the garments, they will wear the garments until changing armor before entering the challenge room in Romeoburg.

Before Jesse, Petra, and Radar are permitted into the Challenge room, Soup and Val offer them some armor to wear. Jesse has up to nine options:

The Tooth Chipper
Goofball Glory
Llama Brown-ish
Please Don't Hit Me
Dented Danger
Feelin' Cute
Armor Number 7
Straps n' Straps
The Golden Apple, a special golden armor which Lluna finds buried under the ground. (determinant)

The champion armor is the armor that either Jack or Petra wears after they were controlled by the admin to be his champion. The champion armor has its very own gauntlet to go with the outfit.
According to Eric Stirpe, it was inspired by Angel's "Archangel".

Jesse has the choice of choosing new armor or keeping Magnus's or Ellegaard's armor in Ivor's far lands house.
The names and descriptions of Ivor's enchanted armors are mentioned by Ivor when looking at them. They are as follows:
"The Adamantine Impervium! Even harder to damage than it is to pronounce!"
"I call this the Star Shield! No object in the Universe can penetrate it!"
"Ah, Dragonsbane. Even the Ender Dragon would've fled from this in terror!"
"I call this one the Shield of Infinity! In no small part because it's infinitely cool!"
"This is Swordbreaker! All but the strongest of weapons would shatter against it!"
"I call this one the Ender Defender! Very strong against an Enderman's attack."
"That's the Redstone Riot! Engineered to be virtually indestructible!"
"This one is named Golden Goliath! As bright and powerful as the Sun itself!"
In "Hero in Residence", Jesse can give comments on his/her armor.
"The Redstone Riot. Beautiful engineering on this one."
"Golden Goliath. Always loved how shiny this one is."
"The Ender Defender. Very fresh armor."
"The Star Shield. Great set of armor."
"The Shield of Infinity. I love how regal this one looks."
"Dragonsbane. So cool."
"Swordbreaker. Nice classic name, awesome modern look."
"Glimmering diamonds and shiny gold. Tim would've looked great in it, if he was real." (Tim's armor)
"How cool is Redstone-infused armor?" (Ellegaard's armor)
"Griefer armor if I've ever seen it. Magnus was a crazy guy." (Magnus's armor)
"Ah, Adamantine Impervium. I always suspected this one was Ivor's favorite."
In the episode "Below the Bedrock", Soup may give her own personal comments on the challenge room armors.
"Don't try to eat armor. Best advice I ever heard." (The Tooth Chipper)
"Poor goofballs. Cut down in their prime." (Goofball Glory)
"Don't ask me how I come up with the names. Sometimes inspiration just comes to ya, y' know?" (Llama Brown-ish)
"Armor of such fine quality you just wanna crouch and yell, 'Please don't hit me!'" (Please Don't Hit Me)
"Dangerous, but also damaged so it's more relatable." (Dented Danger)
"You know, like... one... trillion outta ten! Yeah!" (Feelin' Cute)
"'Cause... it's the seventh... What do you want? Everybody's got off days, you know?" (Armor Number 7)
"That was one day where I was like, 'Soup, how many straps can you put on that armor?'. Turns out a lot, is the answer." (Straps n' Straps)
"Um. How 'bout I call this one... the uh... the uh... Golden Apple! Yeah... I might just be hungry." (determinant)
In Episode 5 of the first season, several sets of Ivor's enchanted armor can be seen on display inside the treasure room.
Sometimes, the armor Jesse picks may also appear on display in the treasure room.
In the first season, skipping Episode 4 will cause the dragonsbane armor to be automatically chosen, while in Season Two, if Episode 1 is skipped and the player starts Episode 2, then the shield of infinity armor will be automatically chosen.
The eight sets of armor for Jesse don't have helmets.
Whilst the sets of armor are all uniquely colored, they are actually palette swaps of each other:
Dragonsbane is a purple variant of Ender Defender.
The Redstone Riot is a red variant of the Shield of Infinity.
The Adamantium Impervium is a darker variant of Swordbreaker.
Golden Goliath is an orange variant of the Star Shield.
Tim's armor has a helmet but Jesse doesn't use it after episode 8.
A glitch can occur with Jesse's iron armor that causes it to appear on Jesse again, despite being destroyed by Lluna.
Unlike other members of the Jesse's team, Jesse's armor does not drop from their inventory after being eliminated in "A Journey's End".