The Prismarine Colossus is a giant, sentient statue-like mob created by Romeo that appear in Minecraft: Story Mode, Season 2, with multiple seen inside the Sea Temple and the Terminal Space. They are a larger version of Prismarine Soldiers built from Prismarine blocks.


== Behavior ==
Without the control of Romeo, prismarine colossi are hostile giants capable of destroying blocks with a single swing of its giant fists. Unless it is controlled by an Admin, like Romeo, they normally stay docile and can be manipulated, such as one colossi throughout Season 2 as it was controlled by Romeo.


== Appearance ==
Prismarine colossi are gigantic statue-like golem mobs composed entirely of prismarine. They are all human in body style with the exception of the head where it has large glowing green eyes and a long tentacle-beard, almost akin to Cthulhu. They possess unique prismarine patterns and shades, such as spirals, square cuts, or different shades, as seen on its head, knees, torso, and shoulder, giving the appearance of "clothes" or "armor". On the back of its head is a large glowing symbol that serves as the colossi's weakspot.


== Appearances ==
In "Hero in Residence," several Prismarine Colossus can be seen in Sea Temple, including one being directly controlled by Romeo. Romeo's Colossus begins to attack Jesse's gang after they obtain a Structure Block, then follows them to Beacontown.
In "Giant Consequences," Romeo uses a Prismarine Colossus form to attack Beacontown. Later, the Prismarine Colossus is destroyed by Jesse using his/her Prismarine Gauntlet.
In "Above and Beyond," there is a Prismarine Colossus near the portal in Terminal Space.
After Romeo notices Jesse's trespass, he summons four Prismarine Colossus. The Colossus vanish after the Golden Gauntlet bursts a shock wave.
After Romeo's powers get stripped off, one of the remaining Prismarine Colossus becomes glitched due to the Terminal Space collapsing, goes berserk, and breaks the bridge to the exit portal. If Jesse chose to save Fred's people in Episode 4, it is distracted by the Giant Enderman, who had followed Radar all the way there, buying the heroes time to escape. The glitched Colossus attempts to land a few hits on the Giant Enderman, only for it to teleport out of the way of its punches. The Giant Enderman then drags it from behind before proceeding to kill the Colossus by violently ripping its head off.


== Trivia ==
Romeo is first seen in the form of a Prismarine Colossus.
He also mentions that Prismarine Colossus require Admin power to control. Therefore, the reason that the other Prismarine Colossus in the Sea Temple stay neutral is possibly because they are all under Romeo's control, despite their hostile nature.
The Prismarine Colossus controlled by Romeo in "Giant Consequences" drops Prismarine Shards on death, but the Prismarine Colossus summoned by Romeo in "Above and Beyond" drop nothing when destroyed.
All Prismarine Foes share one weakness: the symbol on the backs of their heads.