The giant enderman is a giant variant of the enderman created by Romeo in Minecraft: Story Mode - Season Two that first appeared briefly in the end of "Jailhouse Block" and played the role as the primary antagonist during "Below the Bedrock" and as a protagonist in "Above and Beyond" where it decapitates the head of a glitched Prismarine Colossus and disappearing alongside Terminal Space, saving Jesse's gang and allowing an escape.

Like its smaller counterpart, it can teleport but due to its giant size, it has the ability to pick up large chunks of structures or land. It is also capable of eating players whole. Unlike their smaller counterpart they usually attack humans more often then their normal counterparts.

The giant enderman is, as the name suggests, a giant enderman variant created by Romeo. Other than its giant size, it possesses some differences to normal endermen, such as a glowing purple mouth and a rib cage showing through its flesh. Its texture also has a 32x noise overlaying the 16x body.

In the ending of "Jailhouse Block", before the episode ends, the camera moves slowly to the giant enderman, and it screeches.
In "Below the Bedrock", it appeared near the tower to the Sunshine Institute, tearing it apart, having to force Jesse, Petra, Jack, Radar (who had provoked it by staring right in its eyes), Nurm/Lluna, and Xara to flee. It reappeared near the Oasis, while Jesse, Petra, Jack, Radar, and Nurm/Lluna are riding minecarts. When the gang reunites near the portal to escape the Underneath, the giant enderman tries to tear it apart but ends up failing. Fred's people or Radar are either left behind by Jesse to distract the giant enderman to escape.
In "Above and Beyond", if Radar is left behind in the previous episode, the giant enderman would follow him into the Terminal Space, where it confronts the glitched Prismarine Colossus, buying Jesse, his allies and Romeo time to escape. In a short but grueling fight, the giant enderman proves to be more than a match for the glitched Colossus to handle, teleporting away from its attacks before they could connect. Eventually dragging it from behind, it then kills the colossus by ripping its head off, letting out a screech before disappearing into an unknown location or perishing alongside Terminal Space.

Prismarine Colossus (Determinant)

The giant enderman's eyes are closer to the enderman's eyes from Bedrock Edition than the ones from Java Edition.
The status of the giant enderman is unknown as it is presumed that it died alongside the Terminal Space collapsing or possibly, teleported somewhere else, though it is unknown.
The difference of the giant enderman from a regular enderman is that Giant Enderman have open rib cages, while regular enderman do not.