A spear is a weapon that was added in the Mounts of Mayhem. It can be used to strike mobs and entities using its two attack types: charging and jabbing. It was revealed in Minecraft Live - September 2025.

Like other diamond tools, a diamond spear can be upgraded to a netherite spear via a netherite upgrade, although increased durability and resistance to fire/lava in item form are the only benefits. The spear's performance as a melee weapon is unchanged by the upgrade.

Netherite Upgrade Kit +Diamond Spear +Netherite Ingot

Zombies, husks, zombie horsemen, and camel husk jockey riders naturally spawn wielding iron spears. Piglins and zombified piglins naturally spawn wielding golden spears.

Stone spears can be found in ocean ruins, copper spears can be found in the chest of the weaponsmith's houses, and iron spears can be found in both the weaponsmith's house chests and buried treasure chests.
Diamond spears can be exclusively found in bastion remnants and end cities chests, and can be obtained from vaults.

To perform a charge attack, the player must hold down the use key. The spear will be lowered to the attack position, and when released, it will launch to a targeting entity. The amount of damage dealt to it depends on the velocity of the user. This means that the player can deal a very large amount of damage to an entity if they use the spear's charge attack while move very fast.
If the user holds the spear for too long, it begins to shake. If the player charges it even longer, it drops down lower, which no longer knocks back an entity, but deals full damage to it. It will then be drawn back to the holding position.
Some mobs, like zombies when holding a spear, can use the spear's charge attack to damage players and other entities.

To perform a jab attack, the player can use it while standing on the ground, dealing damage to an entity when hit, depending on the tier.

Piglins are attracted to golden spears and run toward any golden spears on the ground. Then they inspect it for 6 to 8 seconds before putting it in their inventory.

Spears can be enchanted with Lunge (with the level ranging from 1 to 3), which allows the players to jab and cause more damage to an entity while swiftly moving past it. However, each time the player uses it, their hunger bar drains out. And the higher the level of Lunge enchantment, the more hunger they lose.

Issues relating to "Spear" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

Spears were originated as:
A weapon in Minecraft Dungeons and in A Minecraft Movie
An add-on based on A Minecraft Movie
Unlike their real-life counterparts, spears cannot be thrown like tridents.
However, it was commonly suggested to be implemented.