Endermen are neutral mobs in Minecraft: Story Mode. Most of them are commonly found in The End, though they are seen in the Overworld in dark areas. They have not been seen in the Nether.


== Behavior ==
Endermen have the ability to pick up and place blocks. Some endermen, who have been trained by Soren, can even build simple structures. They will teleport by their own will or if they are targeted by projectiles such as a thrown snowball, potion, or shot arrow.


== Appearances ==
In "The Order of the Stone", Jesse has the choice to build an enderman for the EnderCon Building Competition.
In "Assembly Required", Jesse and his/her gang see several endermen in Soren's Fortress.
In "The Last Place You Look", Jesse's gang encounter several endermen in The End, and it is revealed that Soren had developed a personal interest with them, spending his time studying them and is trying to teach them to build.
In "A Block and a Hard Place", endermen play a pivotal role in the Wither Storm's defeat, attacking it by picking up blocks from the beast's body, thus opening a hole in it for Jesse to get inside.
In "Jailhouse Block", a Giant Enderman appears after Jesse's gang escapes the Sunshine Institute.
In "Below the Bedrock", the Giant Enderman attacks Jesse's gang. It later returns and attacks Fred's people.
In "Above and Beyond" (determinant), if you choose to make Radar a distraction and save Fred's people, then the Giant Enderman will follow Radar to the Terminal Space, where it would fight and vanquish the glitched Prismarine Colossus.


== Trivia ==
Story Mode Endermen have eyes akin to the eyes of Endermen in Minecraft Bedrock Edition.
Like in Minecraft, endermen have been shown to hate water as it is harmful to them; therefore, when the End was flooded in "The Last Place You Look", they all entered the Overworld to escape from the water in "A Block and a Hard Place". They returned to the End after the Wither Storm's demise.
Strangely, however, they appear to be completely unaffected by rain as shown in Episode 4, unlike in normal Minecraft where they are also damaged by it.
In Minecraft, a player is unable to take a block held by an enderman without killing it. However, this does not apply to Minecraft: Story Mode, as Jesse is shown to simply take the block right out of an enderman's hand. Jesse can also knock a block out of an enderman's hands in Episode 4.
As they also hate being stared right in the eyes, dozens of endermen were provoked by the Wither Storm's tractor beams, as it was the Storm's "eyes".
Gary and Sally are mentioned in Soren's Farewell Song. These are two endermen with names made up by Soren.
In "Order Up!" and "A Portal to Mystery", two of the four books that Soren has written, which are about endermen, can be found on bookshelves. Soren's two other books, which don't involve enderman, can be found in "Access Denied" and "A Journey's End?".