Spiders are hostile mobs that appear in Minecraft: Story Mode.


== Appearance ==
Spiders have dark gray skin and are about one block tall. They have red eyes that glow in the dark and eight legs.


== Appearances ==
In "The Order of the Stone", spiders can be seen in the forest. Later on, a spider jumps on and attacks Jesse. Petra will save him/her from it no matter what he/she does.
In "The Last Place You Look", Jesse's Gang fights spiders in the mob grinder. Later on, Iron Golems fight spiders and other mobs in Soren's Fortress.
In "A Block and a Hard Place", there are spiders running away from the Wither Storm. Furthermore, a Spider Jockey can also be seen. In the maze Jesse will also have to fight off a spider and his/her sword will break.
In "Order Up!", spiders can be seen while Jesse's Gang are fighting monsters. Numerous spiders can also be seen, when the The Blaze Rods are attacking Sky City.
In "A Portal to Mystery", The White Pumpkin activates a trap that causes a group of spiders to attack Jesse and the YouTubers.
In "Access Denied", there are numerous spiders in Crown Mesa which have been installed with Mind-Control Chips. When Jesse is attempting to destroy PAMA, he/she must fight off three Spiders being mind controlled by PAMA.
In "Hero in Residence", spiders attempt to attack Petra and Jesse in underground tunnels and caves.
In "Giant Consequences", while no normal spiders appear, a variant of spiders called Icy Spiders, attack Jesse, Petra, Jack, and "Vos" (Romeo in disguise) in a puzzle room. One of the puzzles is also to make a normal spider's face (determinant).
In "Jailhouse Block", Prison Spiders, a variant of normal spider with red dots on their legs, presumably eyes, are first seen when Jesse and Jack/Petra attempt to escape the Sunshine Institute the first time going into The Burrows. Later after Jesse, Petra, Jack, Radar, Nurm/Lluna, and Xara escape the Sunshine Institute and go into The Burrows near the end of "Jailhouse Block", they re-encounter more prison spiders and prison zombies.


== Sounds ==