Creepers are common hostile mobs found in Minecraft: Story Mode, acting as basic enemies encountered by Jesse and his friends.

Creepers have a habit of sneaking silently up on characters and exploding, hissing before they do so. Creepers will also sometimes lean their body forward when running at a character. One scene shows a creeper squinting it's eyes and mouth a little.

Creepers in Story Mode have the distinct green color with a slightly different texture to those of base game creepers. It's leaf pattern is different and the dark and light markings have less contrast. It's eyes and mouth are also set inside the head unlike the usual flat surface and there are half pixels at the bottom of its mouth to act as a border due to the depth of it. They are also capable of moving their mouth and eyes as one was seen squinting.

In "The Order of the Stone", Jesse's gang can build a creeper statue in the EnderCon Building Competition (determinant).
At the beginning of the episode, a creeper can be seen as Petra and Jesse are falling off the bridge. Jesse pushes it in midair, causing it to blow up knocking several chickens off of a nearby ledge.
In "Assembly Required", when Jesse and Axel or Olivia return with Magnus or Ellegaard, a creeper attempts to explode near them upon their arrival.
Later in Soren's Fortress, a creeper attempts to blow up Jesse and Gabriel/Petra (determinant).
In "The Last Place You Look", in Soren's mob grinder, a group of creepers attack Jesse's gang. Also, during the episode's intro, the player can see more roaming around and attacking Jesse and his/her friends.
In "A Block and a Hard Place", several creepers can be seen, fleeing from the Wither Storm.
In "Order Up!", creepers are one of the mobs Jesse's gang fights outside the Old Builder's Temple. They are also spawned in Sky City.
In "A Portal to Mystery", a painting depicting a creeper wearing a chef's outfit can be seen in the kitchen in The Mansion.
In "Access Denied", Jesse can see some creepers under the control of PAMA.
In "Hero in Residence", many charged creepers are spewed out of the Heckmouth.
In "Below the Bedrock", Jesse fights three creepers while in The Oasis, they later encounter three more after Jesse and Jack's encounter with the scavengers.
In "Above and Beyond", Jesse kills a creeper for gunpowder.

Creepers have had a large role in the destruction of Sky City, as the buildings are majorly damaged from explosions. This is also contributed to by Ghasts.
In the base game, if a creeper is struck by lightning, it will become a charged creeper, capable of explosions twice as powerful as a normal creeper's. While charged creepers are seen in "Hero in Residence", there is no evidence for them to have been struck by lightning.
Creepers can move their mouth and widen/squint their eyes.