For the iron golem in the original game of Minecraft, see Iron Golem.
Iron golems are a passive mob that appears in Minecraft: Story Mode. They first appear in "The Order of the Stone", when Ivor orders one to attack Jesse.

Iron golems are fiercely loyal to their creators, and obey their commands. They also attack any hostile mobs they see. They also attack players if they provoke them. However, they are not very diligent, and can be easily distracted. For example, if Jesse decides to rescue Lukas from Ivor's basement in episode one, the golem is distracted by Reuben's oinking.

Iron golems in Story Mode resemble their base game counterparts in textures with the difference of its eyebrow being slightly elevated, its eye sockets being lowered, and the ability to move its red pupils.

In "The Order of the Stone", Ivor spawns an iron golem to chase Jesse's gang out of his basement.
In "The Last Place You Look", Soren spawns several iron golems to attack the hostile mobs and serve as a ladder.
In "Order Up!", Jesse has the option to create an iron golem to prove himself/herself to the Build Club.
Later, the iron golem follows the fleeing citizens of Sky City down to the surface, and can be seen in the crowd during Isa's speech.

In the base game, iron golems occasionally offer poppies to villagers; however, they're never seen doing that to humans in Minecraft: Story Mode.
This is due to villagers not appearing mostly in both Season 1 and 2, with the exception of Nurm.
Iron golems are also not known to attack creepers. However, in "Order Up!", an iron golem will attack a Creeper, causing it to explode.
Iron golems in Story Mode produce their own idle sounds, which almost sound like metallic growling and roaring that would come from a ship that is sinking
If Jesse builds the iron golem, it will give a "hooray" after the speech by Isa, Milo, and Jesse.
Iron Golems are the first mobs to be built in Minecraft: Story Mode, the second being wither storm, and the third being PAMA (canonically).
Iron golems have the most exclusive variants in Story Mode. (See Golem)