Petrified oak slabs are a unique type of slab available through commands or by upgrading from legacy versions. Unlike all other slabs, they are unobtainable through conventional Survival gameplay and the only way to obtain them is through commands.

Petrified oak slabs are unobtainable in new Survival worlds.

Petrified oak slabs require a pickaxe to mine. When broken, they drop themselves in Java Edition, and regular oak slabs in Bedrock Edition.

Petrified oak slabs are uncraftable in current versions without the use of a data pack or behavior pack.

Petrified oak slabs are obtainable and craftable as one would expect in versions released before Java Edition 1.3.1 (snapshot 12w17a) or  Pocket Edition v0.7.3 alpha, in which they are the only wooden slab type.

Petrified oak slabs are functionally still slabs, and share the majority of their placement, collision and other such behaviors with normally obtainable slabs.

Petrified oak slabs are mostly notable for where their behavior diverges from that expected of their name and appearance.
Unlike other wooden slabs:

Petrified oak slabs make the sounds characteristic of stone.
They require a pickaxe to mine instead of an axe. If broken without a pickaxe, they drop nothing.
They cannot be used to replace wooden slabs in crafting recipes.
They are not flammable, nor are they set on fire by nearby lava.
They cannot be used as fuel in a furnace.
They have a greater blast resistance.
Note blocks placed on top produce bass drum sounds, similarly to other stone-like blocks.
Unlike other slabs in general:

They cannot be crafted or obtained normally in Survival.
They do not have a direct full-block equivalent.
In Bedrock Edition they do not drop themselves, but rather drop an oak slab.

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:
Stone slab and double stone slab:

Wood slab and double wood slab:

Stone slab 2 and double stone slab 2:

Stone slab 3 and double stone slab 3:

Stone slab 4 and double stone slab 4:

Other slabs and double slabs:

Issues relating to "Petrified Oak Slab" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.