Rarity is an attribute assigned to items and enchantments.

There are three rarity levels for items, indicated by colors:

 Common
 Rare
 Unique

Common items have the highest chance of being dropped. There is one common item for each class of armour and weapon, and one for each artifact (except for the Corrupted Pumpkin). Common items salvage for the least emeralds, and are the cheapest to purchase from the Village Merchant. Common items are also the cheapest to upgrade, and generally have lower power levels than other items.
Common items cannot be obtained from the Luxury Merchant or the Piglin Merchant.

Rare items have a smaller chance of being dropped. All common items have a variant that is rare. Rare items generally have similar attributes to common items, and do not have a significant advantage over common items.
Rare items cost more to purchase, gift wrap or upgrade than common items and have a higher power cap of 1. Rare items also salvage for more emeralds.
Rare items can be obtained from all four camp merchants.

Unique items are Melee, Ranged, weapons and armor that possess special, additional attributes. They have the lowest chance of being dropped. They can have a tier 1 natural or otherwise unobtainable Enchantment, or a bonus stat/perk. There are usually multiple unique variants for each class of gear. The only unique artifacts are the corrupted pumpkin, the totem of resistance, and the blightbearer.
Unique items can be obtained from all merchants except for the Village Merchant, unless the hero has Luck of the Sea.

90% of all items are UNIQUE items. And rest are rare and common. Unique items have high chance to emerge or being dropped.

There are 56 unique melee weapons. However, one of them is only available via mods or hacks, that being The Monkey Motivator.

There are 48 unique ranged weapons:

Ancient Bow
Auto Crossbow
Azure Seeker
Baby Crossbows
Bonebow
Bow of Lost Souls
Bubble Burster
Burst Gale Bow
Butterfly Crossbow
Call of the Void
Corrupted Crossbow
Doom Crossbow
Echo of the Valley
Elite Power Bow
Feral Soul Crossbow
Firebolt Thrower
Gloopy Bow
Guardian Bow
Harp Crossbow
Haunted Bow
Hunter's Promise
Imploding Crossbow
Lightning Harp Crossbow
Love Spell Bow
Master's Bow
Mechanical Shortbow
Nautical Crossbow
Nocturnal Bow
Phantom Bow
Pride of the Piglins
Purple Storm
Red Snake
Sabrewing
Shivering Bow
Shrieking Crossbow
Slayer Crossbow
Soul Hunter Crossbow
Spellbound Crossbows
Sugar Rush
The Green Menace
The Pink Scoundrel
The Slicer
Twin Bow
Veiled Crossbow
Voidcaller
Webbed Bow
Weeping Vine Bow
Winter's Touch

There are 41 unique armor items. However, one of them is only available via mods or hacks, that being the Ender armor.

Archer's Armor
Arctic Fox Armor
Beehive Armor
Black Spot Armor
Black Wolf Armor
Cauldron Armor
Cave Crawler
Cloaked Skull
Ember Robe
Ender Armor
Fox Armor
Frost Armor
Frost Bite
Full Metal Armor
Ghost Kindler
Gilded Glory
Glow Squid Armor
Goat Gear
Golden Piglin Armor
Hero's Armor
Highland Armor
Hungriest Horror
Hungry Horror
Living Vines Armor
Nimble Turtle Armor
Opulent Armor
Renegade Armor
Rugged Climbing Gear
Shadow Walker
Souldancer Robe
Spider Armor
Splendid Robe
Stalwart Armor
Sturdy Shulker Armor
Sweet Tooth
The Spooky Gourdian
The Troubadour
Titan's Shroud
Unstable Robes
Verdant Robe
Wither Armor

There are three unique artifacts, one of which was obtained at the Spooky Fall event. It is no longer obtainable. The other two are unused, and were never obtainable outside of modding/hacks.

There are two types of rarity levels for enchantments:

 Common
 Powerful

Powerful enchantments cost one extra enchantment point for each upgrade (2 for level 1, 3 for level 2 and 4 for level 3). Powerful enchantments can only be obtained once adventure mode is unlocked unless it is a unique perk.

There are eight powerful melee weapons enchantments.

There are nine powerful ranged weapons enchantments:

There are eleven powerful armor enchantments: