Weapons are a category of equippable items in Minecraft Dungeons that are used to attack and defeat mobs in during missions. The hero can obtain new weapons from opening chests, defeating mobs, exchanging emeralds with the village merchant, luxury merchant, mystery merchant, piglin merchant, and from gifts provided by heroes of other players through the gift wrapper. Weapons can have up to three player selected enchantments to apply additional properties.
The maximum power level for weapons is 263. Gilded weapons can drop in Ancient Hunts and be obtained from the piglin merchant with a maximum power of 251. Gilded weapons at power level 263 are obtainable through the Tower. Seasonal equipment can be obtained gilded.

Melee weapons are weapons that can be used to damage nearby entities. There are currently seventy-eight known melee weapons. This includes forty-eight uniques, of which forty-seven are obtainable, and three are seasonal event exclusive.
Close range combat is the hero's unlimited and reliable source of damage output with no ammo requirement. However, the immediate proximity to mobs positions the hero within melee mobs' attack ranges, risking loss of health and receiving negative status effects such as becoming Frozen. Ranged mobs also take advantage of the time taken for the melee hero to approach them.
Long ranged melee weapons such as glaives can help keep a distance between the hero and mobs or received damage can be mitigated and nullified by consistent healing with Radiance on high speed weapons such as the fighter's bindings.
If no melee weapons are equipped, the hero's fists are used to inflict 1 damage point to mobs.
With correct equipment setup and a touch of experimentation, Melee weapons can be the devastator to the Arch-Illager's forces. Slow and hard hitting or rapid and unforgiving, Melee weapons should always be considered - even if the player prefers a Ranged approach.

Combo length is the number of different attack movements in a Melee weapon's attack sequence.
The final attack of a combo triggers Shockwave and Swirling enchantments and inflict the maximum damage specified for the weapon in the inventory.

The following equipment include weapons used exclusively by mobs and weapons that went unused.

Ranged weapons are weapons that can be used to damage entities from a distance away. There are currently 61 known ranged weapons, including 42 uniques, all of which are obtainable. 
At the cost of 1 arrow per use and becoming stationary during aiming, ranged weaponry is the player's finite solution of outputting damage whist distancing themselves from mob onslaught, unless of course the player decides to utilise it at close range. Attacking at distance does not go unnoticed; mobs nearby to the damaged mob are alerted and begin to target the ranged player.
If ranged damage is not the player's focus, ranged weapons can fulfilled a utility role instead by applying enchantments such as Wild Rage, Tempo Theft, Anima Conduit, or Radiance Shot.
If no ranged weapons are equipped, the game notifies the player through a sound cue upon pressing the Ranged Attack Button.
If an excuse to excessively roll, extra healing and distraction sources, or an emergency destroy all solution is demanded, players can have confidence that ranged weaponry can meet their needs - even for those preferring to slash, pummel and pierce through the Arch-Illager's army with Melee-based responses.

The ammo number represents the number of arrows the player possess and is shown in the quiver slot of the Heads-up Display. When ammo number reaches zero, ranged weaponry cannot be used. Arrow stocks can be restored by collecting arrow bundles that drop from chests, mobs, Surprise Gift, and Recycler. Infinity provides a chance for arrows to not be consumed upon use while Multishot, Chain Reaction, and Bonus Shot can project more arrows per arrow fired - especially formidable on ranged weapons that already fire multiple projectiles such as the winter's touch and harp crossbow.
Arrows that hit a wall disappear within 10 seconds.
Collected TNT resides in the quiver slot up to a maximum of 3 and prevents the use of ranged weaponry until the TNT has been thrown.
fireworks arrow, flaming quiver, torment quiver, thundering quiver, harpoon quiver, and void quiver artifacts place special ammo in the quiver slot that are consumed before regular arrows.

Arrows fired when submerged in Hidden Depths missions are greatly slowed and decelerate rapidly making them unviable for underwater combat.  This disadvantage can be avoided by using the harpoon crossbow or nautical crossbow, or by activating the harpoon quiver to gain harpoon ammo.

Bows are Ranged weapons that can fire a Charged Shot when the Ranged Attack Button is held and released. Charged Shots deal more damage to mobs than Uncharged or Partially charged Shots. Bows have access to Charge involving enchantments such as that do not appear on Crossbows.

Crossbows are Ranged Weapons that fire continuously when holding the Ranged Attack Button. Unlike bows, crossbows do not fire charged shots; however, they do fire quickly. The lack of charge shots prevents them from obtaining enchantments involving charging.

 ammo +50%. Cutlass combo 4 -> 2. Pickaxe combo 2 -> 1. Daggers range +25%.
|Changed so that after losing a life, players are now given a bundle of arrows if they had less than one full bundle.
|Allowed battlestaff, battlestaff of terror, and growing staff to drop at Lower Temple.
|Fixed soul related items while wearing soul related gear propelling players into the air. }}

Armor
Artifacts
Enchanting
Locations
Daily Trials