A boss is a mob that can be found within a boss arena within the various missions of Minecraft Dungeons. Out of the thirty-nine (39) total missions, only eleven have bosses. Usually, only one final boss can appear within each mission, but two appear within the Obsidian Pinnacle. The flames of the nether is the only DLC without bosses, because the Orb of Dominance is not present within it.

Mainland bosses

Bosses accessible on the Mainland continent as well as non-DLC bosses.

Arch-Illager  An Illager with a sideways head. Appears in all non-DLC missions to summon Ambushes and Bosses, but isn't attackable until the Obsidian Pinnacle is reached where he can be fought.
Corrupted Cauldron  A corrupted, golem-like cauldron within the Soggy Swamp.
Heart of Ender  A large creature similar to an Enderman with six tentacle-looking arms. It is created after the Arch-Illager is sucked inside the Orb. It is the final boss in the main game, not counting those found in the DLCs or the secret boss.
Mooshroom Monstrosity  A golem made of stone and redstone patches, as well as mushroom spores, sprouting out of the it's body.
Nameless One  A large skeleton and stronger necromancer variant. It dwells within the Desert Temple. It also has a staff with a green orb on the top.
Redstone Monstrosity  A monstrous stone-and-redstone machine built within the Fiery Forge.
Island Realms and Other Dimensions bosses

Bosses exclusive to the Island Realms or the Other Dimensions.

Ancient Guardian  The most ancient guardian of guardians that was corrupted by a shard of the orb. It resides within the abyssal monument.
The version of the Ancient Guardian before the fight is called the Fake Ancient Guardian.
Jungle Abomination  An overgrown monstrosity made up of various objects ranging from plant matter to debris to house a shard of the orb. It resides within the overgrown temple.
Tempest Golem  The timeless sanctuary protector of the gale sanctum.
Treetop Whisperer  A whisperer ensnared by the remnants of the orb's corruption upon the treetop tangle of the Jungle Island.
Vengeful Heart of Ender  It is the final boss of the ultimate edition of the game, and resides within the Broken Citadel.
The version of the Vengeful Heart of Ender is called the Imperfect Heart of Ender.
Wretched Wraith  An unspeakable wraith that was corrupted by the Orb, proceeding to spread a creeping winter throughout the Overworld. It dwells within the Lone Fortress.
Arcade bosses

Bosses exclusive to the Arcade version of the game.

Giant Cave Spider  A larger and enhanced cave spider variant that was given power thanks to the Arch-Illager, and lurks within the Cacti Canyon.
Giant Royal Guard  A larger and enhanced royal guard variant that was given power thanks to the Arch-Illager, and dwells on the Squid Coast.
Obsidian Monstrosity  A large, colossal golem made of stone and powered by crying obsidian-like blocks , and resides atop the Obsidian Pinnacle.
Other bosses

Some powerful mobs were once able to appear as a boss within specific missions.

Elder Guardian  a boss within the Coral Rise, the Radiant Ravine, and the Abyssal Monument.
Evoker  a boss within the Pumpkin Pastures, Colossal Rampart, Woodland Prison and Woodland Mansion.
Ghast  a boss within the Basalt Deltas and the Crimson Forest.
Illusioner  a boss within the Frosted Fjord, the Lost Settlement, and Colossal Rampart.
Redstone Golem  a boss within the Redstone Mines.
Skeleton Horseman  a boss within the Abyssal Monument.
Wildfire  a boss within the Tower and any mission in Flames of the Nether.

The developers posted on Twitter various different titles and names each boss has.

Powerful mobs
Boss Summonable
Ancients