The Treetop Whisperer is a natural boss whisperer, a remnant of the corruption of the shard of the Orb of Dominance, that can be found within the Treetop Tangle of Minecraft Dungeons.

The Treetop Whisperer looks like an enchanted whisperer, but has a darker color scheme as well as a purple color within.

Treetop Tangle

The Treetop Whisperer acts almost exactly like a whisperer would, with the only difference being that the Treetop Whisperer possesses the following attributes:

Altruistic level 3
Huge
Body scaling size: 1.5
Regeneration level 3
Base health regeneration: 5 per seconds.
Two enchanted leapleaf henchmen
Protection
Thorns
Basic attack
The Treetop Whisperer has long arms which can hit the hero at close range.

Summon (Attack A)
The Treetop Whisperer summons quick growing vines at a distance to surround the hero in a trapping pattern. When quick growing vines are summoned, the Treetop Whisperer waves their arms, and a pink mist emanates from their hands, while pink cracks appear on the ground where quick growing vines proceed to appear. Used more commonly.

Poison-quill vines (Attack B)
The Treetop Whisperer is capable of punching the ground, summoning one poison-quill vine to appear from the pink cracks. Used sparsely. Each poison-quill vine summoned has two times more HP than the Treetop Whisperer.

Grapple vines (Attack C)
The Treetop Whisperer stretches their arms forward, closing their palms, summoning a small patch of entangle vines which can trap heroes and mobs for three seconds, before disappearing.

The Treetop Whisperer shares sound files with whisperers.

The death sounds of the treetop whisperer is pitched to 0.5 multiple from get hit sounds.

In the game files, The Treetop Whisperer is categorized under the Whisperer folder, and is referred to internally by the name BP_TreetopWhispererCharacter_C.
Base data
Enemy lock radius: 13 blocks distance
Base health: 900
Base attack damage: 60
Flee range: 7.5 blocks distance
Flee speed: 1.2
approach-range :15 blocks distance
Max Speed: 4 blocks per seconds
Offensive Range: 13 blocks distance
Capsule Half Height: 105.0
Capsule Radius: 48.0
Max Walk Speed: 8 blocks per seconds
Stun Multiplier: 1.0
Melee attack
Target Attack Range Margin : 2.5 blocks distance
Attack Range: 2.5 blocks distance
Damage Delay Seconds: 0.3 seconds
Cone Angle Degrees: 30
CooldownSeconds: 0.5 seconds
Attack Animation Time Duration Seconds: 0.665 seconds
Effects Pushback Multiplier: 1
Push back Z Factor: 1
Summon attack
attack-delay-A: 1 seconds
attack-delay-B: 1.4 seconds
attack-delay-C: 0.1 seconds
anim-duration-A: 1.72 seconds
anim-duration-B: 3.125 seconds
anim-duration-C: 3.708 seconds
Attack probability (1)
attack-probability-A1: 0.5
attack-probability-B1: 0.15
attack-probability-C1: 0.35
Attack probability (2)
attack-probability-A2: 0.15
attack-probability-B2: 0.1
attack-probability-C2: 0.75
BP_Altruistic_C Properties
Level: 3
BP_Huge_C Properties
Scale: 1.5
Treat As Inherrent: true
BP_Regeneration_C Properties
Mob Regeneration Amount Per Second: 5.0
Level: 3

The Treetop Whisperer is not actually a boss, despite having the health bar of one. Defeating the Treetop Whisperer does not reward heroes with 600 Adventure points.
In an article on Minecraft.net, the Treetop Whisperer was identified as being a golem and possessing he/him/his pronouns. He was described as being massive, nightmarish, and smelling bad.