The corrupted cauldron  is a golem-like boss that can be found within the various missions of Minecraft Dungeons. It is the first boss encountered in the game (excluding Arcade).

The corrupted cauldron is a large golem-like cauldron with a glowing purple mouth and eyes. Its spoon can move without anyone controlling it. It is the second smallest boss in the game.

Soggy Swamp (Boss)
Daily Trial
Tower (Boss)

The corrupted cauldron has three behaviors. It does not move during its battle, even if struck by a Gravity-enchanted weapon.

Basic attack
The corrupted cauldron creates a ring of purple fire on the mossy cobblestone blocks around it, which deals heavy damage to anything that steps in it. Used occasionally.

Intense spin
The corrupted cauldron, after a stirring animation, conjures a variety of dangerous mobs to join the battle.

Strong attack
The corrupted cauldron sucks up the corpses of minion mobs that it not a pink slime. Once the corpse of a mob is inside of the corrupted cauldron, the cauldron consumes it, regenerating 1% of its total health. It is somewhat similar to the leeching enchantment.

Minion
These minions are summoned by the corrupted cauldron. Minions are related with their own summoner. After minions die, their corpse does not disappear immediately but keep bouncing and suck by the corrupted cauldron.
Corrupted cauldron only absorb its own minions corpse. For example in tower, corrupted cauldron do not sucks up drowned corpses (Summoned by drowned necromancer). Minions kills by corrupted cauldron in 20 blocks distance if the cauldron is defeated. 
Minions:

Chicken Jockey
Chicken Jockey Tower
Husk
Vindicator 
Zombie 

A pink slime, is a slime variant that can be found exclusively summoned by the corrupted cauldron within Minecraft Dungeons.

Pink slimes are medium-sized pink slimes that have a dark purple mouth and eyes, a purple inner core, and a light purple outer layer.

Soggy Swamp (Boss summonable)
Tower (Boss summonable)

Pink slimes are immobile, preferring to stay in one spot and attacking heroes from a distance. They do not have a jump behavior, unlike normal slimes.

Medium attack
Pink slimes attack heroes on-sight by shooting small purple projectiles that deal moderate damage upon being hit.
Pink slime's projectiles only deal 20% damage to corrupted cauldron.

Armor
Evocation Robe
Ember Robe
Verdant Robe
Mystery Armor
Artifacts
Fishing Rod
Harvester
Lightning Rod
Totem of Regeneration
Melee Gear
Daggers
Fangs of Frost
Moon Daggers
Sheer Daggers
Double Axe
Cursed Axe
Whirlwind
Glaive
Grave Bane
Venom Glaive
Soul Knife
Eternal Knife
Truthseeker
Ranged Gear
Hunting Bow
Ancient Bow
Hunter's Promise
Master's Bow
Scatter Crossbow
Lightning Harp Crossbow
Harp Crossbow

The purple projectiles that pink slimes are able to shoot are very similar to the Jack o' Lantern's pumpkin balls.

Issues relating to "Corrupted Cauldron" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

Slime