For chickens in the original game of Minecraft, see Chicken. For the hostile mobs, see Chicken Jockey.

Chickens are passive mobs that appeared in both Minecraft Story Mode - Season One and Minecraft: Story Mode - Season Two normally seen pecking on the ground and wandering about aimlessly, 


== Behavior ==
Chickens, like their base counterparts will just wander about aimlessly and oftentimes peck on the ground. But, when a chicken is being ridden by a baby zombie, it becomes hostile.


== Appearance ==
Chickens in Story Mode resemble their normal base counterparts with the exception of having thick legs and feet, instead of a flat texture seen in their base counterparts.


== Appearances ==
In "The Order of the Stone", Jesse breaks Sigge's chicken machine to distract Reuben (Human) at EnderCon. Jesse may also find a chicken looking for Reuben when he/she runs off. He/she also encounters the chickens when trying to escape EnderCon.
In "Assembly Required", if Jesse visits Boom Town (determinant), a Griefer will throw an egg at him/her, spawning a baby chicken.
Later, when Jesse is throwing eggs at some griefers (determinant), if he/she chooses not to throw the last egg, it will spawn a baby chicken.
During the battle at The Death Bowl, a baby chick spawns when Jesse throws an egg at Magnus.
In "A Block and a Hard Place", while Jesse and Reuben (pig) are inside the Wither Storm, they can see withered chickens along with other withered people, and in the beginning of the episode, a baby zombie can be seen riding on a chicken trying to escape the Wither Storm.
In "Order Up!", the Eversource is revealed to be a chicken which lays Spawn Eggs.
In "A Portal to Mystery", a painting in the dining room shows a baby zombie riding a chicken before it was replaced with a painting with The White Pumpkin on it.
In "Access Denied", Jesse can see three chickens in Crown Mesa with Mind-Control Chips attached to their heads. They appear to peck at the ground in perfect unison.
In "A Journey's End?", If Jesse doesn't choose "chicken-sized zombie" (including keeping silent) in the beginning of Episode 1, many zombie-sized chickens can be seen in living in a dimension with Hadrian and Mevia, one even attacking Hadrian.
In "Hero in Residence", Jesse collects some eggs from chickens if he/she decides to help Stampy Cat and Stacy Plays in Beacontown.
In "Below the Bedrock", a chicken appears, and Jesse later is asked a question about the chicken's name: Waffles.
Petra also mentions how she met a chicken named Benedict (The Eversource).


== Trivia ==
The Eversource (Benedict) and Fred's former pet (Waffles) are the only named chickens in Minecraft: Story Mode.
The Eversource is the only chicken known to lay spawn eggs instead of regular eggs, though it is hinted that other Eversources once existed in the universe of Story Mode.
The Usher, Reuben, is revealed to have alektorophobia (the fear of chickens). The only other Minecraft related character known with this phobia is CommuniKate in the Minecraft Mini-Series.


== Gallery ==