Lluna is a pet mob and Stella's pet llama who first appeared in Minecraft: Story Mode - Season Two in "Hero in Residence" where she and Stella met Jesse's gang and went along with their adventure of stopping Romeo.


== Appearance ==
Lluna is a teenage llama who possesses many unique traits, somewhat like Reuben. Firstly, she is a white llama who possesses unique blue eyes. She normally wears a scarf with a light blue and purple pattern on her neck. She also has an executive outfit made by Stella, which is a deep purple and black set of a scarf and small hat with a purple accent in the middle.


== Personality ==
Lluna is a disobedient, spirited llama, as shown when she tried to escape from Champion City several times due to Stella's abuse, which led her to become fearful whenever she gets threatened by her. Lluna is a smart llama, as shown in "Jailhouse Block" when she tries to find a way to kill hostile mobs (determinant), and she seems to be able to understand speech, as shown in "Hero in Residence" when she frowns at Petra's comments on her as well as Jesse making a joke in Champion City (determinant).
Lluna is notably obsessed with treasure, as she is known as a "treasure-sniffing llama" and led to Jesse finding the Prismarine Gauntlet. She tried to bite Jesse's Prismarine Gauntlet twice in "Giant Consequences," the amulet once, and even Fred's compass once in "Below the Bedrock." She also sniffed out the buried "Golden Apple" armor in "Below the Bedrock" (determinant).


== Episodes ==
"Hero in Residence"
"Giant Consequences"
"Jailhouse Block"
"Below the Bedrock" (Determinant)
"Above and Beyond"


== Trivia ==
Like Reuben, Lluna is a mob with age, in this case, a teenage llama. 
Also like Reuben, she is capable of understanding speech and ready to take a fight as she has taken down a few mobs.
She is also capable of being ridden despite her small size.
Lluna's name was revealed early during E3 2017 in a Twitch stream.
Lluna is quite unique for a Llama as she didn't take fall damage from a height. This was seen in "Giant Consequences" as the gang fell from a height.
It was confirmed by Eric Stirpe that both Lluna and Stella's names are a reference to the book "Stellaluna".


== References ==