The Stellar Refraction Table is a block added by Astral Sorcery. It is used to engrave glass to create potions and enchant items or books.
The table has two slots - the first one accepts Parchment, Water Bottles, Books and enchantable items, the second accepts Infused Glass and Engraved Glass. Right clicking the table with them will insert the item, shift-right clicking with an empty hand will remove items instead.

Right clicking the table will open the GUI. The left and right sides of the GUI contain constellations currently up in the sky known to the player. The top shows the inserted items. When parchment and an unengraved Infused Glass is inserted, dragging constellation images from the slots on the side will attempt to draw them on the parchment. The chance to draw the constellation depends on time of night (highest at midnight) and the amount of constellations already drawn on the parchment (decreases with more drawings). If drawing fails, all drawings will be removed and one parchment will be consumed. Once 3 constellations are drawn, the glass will be engraved.
The levels of enchantments or potion effects applied by the engraved glass depends on the overlap of the drawn constellations. For the best result, every constellation's area (every constellation has the same square area) should be covered by 25% by the following constellations applied. This means that the last applied constellation will always be of 66% strength as it cannot be cover by anything following. If a single constellation is applied multiple times, the strength of its effect is the average of all of its drawing's effects (No benefit in applying the same constellation more than once). 
Putting a water bottle in the table with an engraved glass will convert it into "Stardew" - a potion with the glass's engraved constellations' effects. The duration of each of the effects is a random number between 4,800 ticks (4 minutes) and 7,200 ticks (6 minutes). There's a 1 in 30 chance the resulting potion will have the Phoenix-Fire potion effect added. Making potions on the table has a 1 in 3 chance to damage the glass.
Putting a book or an unenchanted enchantable item in the table with an engraved glass will enchant it with the glass's engraved constellations' enchantments. Enchantments are added in the order of the constellations listed on the glass's tooltip. If any enchantments are conflicting (i.e. Fortune and Silk Touch), only the first will be added unless the following ones ignore conflicts. Enchanting on the table always damages the glass.


== Constellation effects ==


== Recipe ==


== Astral Tome Entry ==


== References ==