A block entity (also known as tile entity) is extra data associated with a block, beyond the finite set of block states associated with each block.


== Usage ==
Block entities store additional information about certain blocks, with the type of information varying by block.  In some cases, this information is used to create a more complex model, such as the book on an enchanting table.  In other cases, it is used to store contents of an object.
Blocks with block entities can be moved by pistons in Bedrock Edition, but not in Java Edition.


== List of block entities ==
These are the current blocks that hold block entities.


== Render limits ==
                                                                           
Some block entities, or their effects, stop being rendered beyond a hard-coded block limit which is modeled after the radius of a sphere. This limit is not affected by the Render Distance nor the Entity Distance scale in the Video Settings.
Block entities that stop rendering beyond 64 blocks include:

Banners
Beds
Chests
Conduits
Decorated Pots
Ender chests
End portals
Hanging Signs
Heads
Signs
Shulker boxes
Trapped chests
Some effects related to block entities stop rendering beyond a number of blocks:

The beacon and end gateway beams stop rendering beyond 256 blocks in Java Edition or 64 blocks in Bedrock Edition or when the end gateway is out of frame.
The contents of a campfire stop rendering beyond 64 blocks.
The book on a lectern stops rendering beyond 64 blocks.
The mob inside a monster spawner stops spinning beyond the  RequiredPlayerRange, which is 16 blocks by default, and stops rendering beyond 64 blocks.
The note particles emitted by a note block stop rendering beyond 32 blocks.
Pistons stop animating beyond 64 blocks.
The book on an enchanting table stops rendering beyond 64 blocks.
The outlines created by a structure block stop rendering beyond 96 blocks.
The bell part of the model of a bell, but not the frame, stops rendering beyond 64 blocks.


== See also ==
Chunk format § Block entity format – describes the save format for block entities
Entities, which are all the dynamic, moving objects throughout the Minecraft world, plus several non-moving objects that resemble blocks.
Block states, which are, like block entities, extra pieces of data that further define a block.