The jungle abomination is the natural golem-like boss that can be found within the various missions of Minecraft Dungeons.

The creation of the jungle abomination is the result of the shattering of the orb of dominance. One of the shards of the orb landed within the sun room of an overgrown temple and began to spread its corruption across the rest of the jungle island. The shard first took control of the island by corrupting quick growing vines and poison-quill vines. It then created the jungle abomination as a result of manipulating its environment, creating a golem composed of leaves, branches, roots, and other objects. It then used this overgrown monstrosity to protect itself and grow stronger. As a result, the shard within the jungle abomination took full control of the island, as noted by the loud roars it emits throughout all of the missions. Its quest to regain its powers lead to the corruption of the natives of the island: the leapleaves and the whisperers. Its plans for the island were never fulfilled, as the jungle abomination, along with the shard within it was destroyed once and for all, and the island now recovers from the corruption caused by the shard.

The jungle abomination appears to be an overgrown monstrosity composed of logs, dirt and stone, and has moss and vines growing on it. Its left arm has what appears to be a villager statue on the end, bound by its vines, and its right arm is a vine. It has glowing eyes similar to that of an enderman, as well as its mouth and a large flower on its torso where the shard is located. It is 7.2 blocks tall.

Overgrown Temple (Boss)
Tower (Boss)

The jungle abomination has five different behaviors. It is the slowest and one of the largest mobs in the game, and possesses one of the largest health pools.

Vulnerable stun cycle
The jungle abomination may become stunned and vulnerable for five seconds after taking damage, with its defense significantly reduced by 60% and it not moving or attacking.

Attack
The jungle abomination attempts to crush the hero by using its left arm with the villager statue. The jungle abomination cannot move or turn when using this attack. This attack also inflicts the poison effect on hit. The damage of the jungle abomination's melee attack is the same as the creeper's explosion. 

Summon
The jungle abomination summons two to four whisperers. When below half health, it can also summon two leapleaves.

Vine attack
The jungle abomination whips its vine-like right arm into the ground and four to ten abomination vines rise from the ground to attack the hero. This attack seems to be used when the abomination falls below half health and deals 40% of the melee's smash per vine.

Poison darts
The jungle abomination can shoot out two circles of twelve poison darts from itself that inflict the poison effect on hit. At lower health values, it may combine this attack with the vine attack.

An abomination vine is an entity that can be summoned by the jungle abomination within the jungle awakens DLC of Minecraft Dungeons.

Abomination vines are vine-like mobs, and look like they are made of wood and plants.

Abomination vines behave similarly to quick growing vines, but they are immune to all forms of damage and can do contact damage to the hero when they sprout up. The jungle abomination usually summons about 8 of these scattered in a large circle around itself, but can do a few other patterns such as just four of them in a small square around itself. They sink back down into the ground after a few seconds. Despite being invincible, they can still be stunned by heroes using the snowball or stunning enchantments, although it has no effect.

The jungle abomination has 19,000 HP. It has 25,000 HP in The Tower. On Default I, all mobs have 9.6% health and 12% damage of what is set in the code. It has the second highest health out of all the bosses in the game, only behind the Mooshroom Monstrosity

Armor
Ghostly Armor (Daily Trials)
Ghost Kindler (Daily Trials)
Mercenary Armor
Renegade Armor
Ocelot Armor
Shadow Walker
Thief Armor
Spider Armor
Artifacts
Corrupted Seeds
Soul Healer
Wind Horn
Melee gear
Axe
Firebrand
Great Hammer
Hammer of Gravity
Stormlander
Spear
Fortune Spear
Whispering Spear
Ranged gear
Soul Bow
Nocturnal Bow
Trickbow
The Green Menace
The Pink Scoundrel

Foley

Vocal

In the game files, the abomination vine is known internally as the JungleAbominationVine.
The Jungle Abomination is the only DLC boss  that was constructed by the Shard of Dominance.