Villagers are passive mobs that inhabit villages, work at their professions, breed, and interact with each other. Villagers' outfits vary according to their biome, and adult Villagers' outfits vary depending on their occupation. A player can trade with them using emeralds as currency. 
They are also the most complex mob in the game, expressing a vast array of behaviors.  


== Spawning ==


=== Natural generation ===
Villagers can be found in every type of village, which can spawn in several biomes such as plains, snowy plains, savannas, deserts, taigas, and snowy taigas‌ and can cut into other biomes such as swamps and jungles. This can create several different types of villagers, each unique to the biome they spawn in. When the village is generated, unemployed villagers spawn in them, the number of which depends on the buildings in that village, as some buildings generate villagers inside and some do not.
A cleric villager and cleric zombie villager spawn locked up in the basements of igloos (if the basement generates) under the carpet of the floor. In Bedrock Edition, the villager and zombie villager inside igloo basements have random professions instead of always being clerics. The cleric villager can also turn into a leatherworker villager since the cauldron in the basement is closer to the villager.


=== Curing ===

Giving a zombie villager the Weakness effect and then feeding it a golden apple starts the curing process. After five minutes, it transforms into a villager, displaying purple Nausea status effect particles for 10 seconds after being cured.  The villager retains the profession it had as a zombie, if it had one before turning into a zombie villager. In Bedrock Edition, if the zombie villager is player spawned, it adopts a randomly chosen profession. The villager can also be a nitwit, as the game counts it as a "profession" but the nitwit villager still can't work. If employed, the cured villager offers discounts on most of its trades.


== Drops ==
A villager, either adult or baby, does not ordinarily drop any items or experience when killed. However, when a player holds an emerald or other item a villager is willing to trade for, the item it offers in trade appears in its hands, alternating between items if there are multiple items the villager wants to trade. 
Upon successful trading, a villager drops 3–6.
Upon successful trading, while willing to breed, 8–11 is dropped.


== Behavior ==


=== Movement patterns ===
Nitwits and unemployed villagers leave their homes at day and begin to explore the village. Generally, they wander inside the village during the day. They may go indoors or outdoors, periodically making mumbling sounds. Occasionally, two villagers may stop and turn to look at each other, in a behavior called socializing, during which they stare at another villager for 4–5 seconds at a time. They continuously stare at a nearby player unless the villager is trying to get into a house at night, farm food, work, or flee from a zombie or illager. Baby villagers may jump on beds and play tag with each other, similarly to how baby piglins and baby hoglins play tag.
In Bedrock Edition, baby villagers do not stop continuously in front of players, though they still do stare as they move.
Villagers tend to not travel far from their beds in a large village unless the job site or the nearest gossip site (bell) is far from their beds.
Villagers, like other mobs, can find paths around obstructions, avoid walking off cliffs of heights greater than 3 blocks, and avoid some blocks that cause harm. However, in crowded situations, one villager can push another off a cliff or into harm's way.
Villagers emit green particles if they join a village, set a bed, or acquire a job site/profession.
Villagers run inside at night or during rain, closing doors behind them. They attempt to sleep at night, but if they cannot claim a bed, they stay indoors near a bed until morning. In the morning, they head outside and resume normal behavior. However, some villagers, such as nitwits, stay outside later than others unless being chased by an illager or zombie.
If a villager finds itself outside the village boundary, or a villager without a village detects a village boundary within 32 blocks, it moves quickly back within the boundary. A villager taken more than 32 blocks away from its village boundary forgets the village within about 6 seconds. Whether in a village or not, a villager is never prone to despawning.
Villagers can open all wooden doors and find paths or blocks of interest behind the doors. However, they cannot open any trapdoors, fence gates, or iron doors. Villagers can climb ladders, but do not recognize them as paths and do not deliberately use them. Any climbing of ladders seems to be a side effect of them being pushed into the block by another mob, (likely, and most often, other villagers). Unfortunately, this behavior can leave them stranded on the second floors and roofs of some village structures, as they lack the necessary AI to intentionally descend ladders. A simple fix for these situations is for the player to manually push the villager back toward the ladder hole and then install a wooden trapdoor at the top, after the villager is returned to the ground level. One way to prevent a villager from climbing ladders is to break the first ladder touching the ground thus requiring a player to jump to the ladder to climb.


==== Getting attacked ====
Villagers flee from zombies, zombie villagers, husks, drowned, zombified piglins ‌, zoglins, vindicators, pillagers (even if their crossbow has been broken), ravagers, and vexes within 8 blocks, and evokers and illusioners within 12 blocks in Java Edition/16 blocks in Bedrock Edition. Like other passive mobs, villagers sprint away when attacked. Villagers do not run away from skeletons (and their variants), spiders, or cave spiders since these hostile mobs are passive towards villagers, although a skeleton arrow might hit a villager by accident.


==== Preferred path ====
Villagers favor pathways to reach a selected destination and try to stay in low-cost blocks, like the dirt path or cobblestone blocks. They also avoid jumping.


=== Job site blocks ===

Unemployed villagers (other than babies and nitwits) seek employment at job site blocks (also referred to as workstations), and employed villagers use job site blocks to refresh their trades (see § Working). Villagers who have made their first trade can only claim a site block that corresponds with their profession, whereas tradeless villagers may change their profession to match a site block. 
In Java Edition, unemployed villagers claim job site blocks by searching for the nearest unclaimed site in a 48-block sphere. When a suitable site block is detected, the villager starts pathfinding to it, staking a provisional claim. This can only occur while the villager is awake. A provisional claim is released if the villager cannot reach the block within 90 seconds, however the villager may try again immediately. To fully claim the site and change profession, the villager must approach within a 2-block radius of the job site's center. When a job site block is fully claimed, its owner emits green particles, and no other villager can claim the block unless the owner relinquishes it. 
In Bedrock Edition, all villagers search for unclaimed job sites in a 16 block radius and 4 block height. If a site block is found, it is added to a shared list of valid job site blocks for the whole village. An unemployed villager with a bed claims the first site block on that list and immediately change profession to match, regardless of distance or accessibility to the site block. A villager may make a claim while sleeping. If a villager cannot pathfind to their claimed site, both the block and the villager emit anger particles; the job site block may need to be broken before the villager relinquishes it. When a job site block is claimed, both the block and the villager making the claim emit green particles and the site block is removed from the list.


=== Gossiping ===
Villagers can store certain memories about players in the form of gossip. These get spread to other villagers whenever they talk with each other. Each piece of gossip is one of five types, and it stores a value as well as a target. Gossips generate and increase in value as a result of various player actions. The target is the player who caused the gossip. Together the gossip values determine a player's reputation with the villager, which influence trading prices and the hostility of naturally spawned iron golems.

Trading with or curing a villager increase the value of the corresponding gossips for the targeted villager only. When a villager is attacked or killed, however, it instead generates the major negative gossip in every other villager it could see (eye-to-eye line of sight) inside a box extending 16 blocks from the villager in all coordinate directions.
When a piece of gossip is shared, it is received at a lower value than the sharer has it. Gossips also decay a certain amount (see Decay column) every 20 minutes. Since major positive gossip have a share penalty equal to its max value and a decay of 0, it cannot be shared and never decays.
A player's total reputation with a villager is determined by multiplying each gossip's value by their respective multiplier and adding the results together. For example, if a player has recently cured a villager for the first time but also attacked the villager twice, their reputation with that villager would be 5 × 20 + 25 - 50 = 75. After 40 minutes the gossips have decayed twice, making the player's reputation 5 × 20 + 23 - 10 = 113.
The prices of a villager's trades all get reduced by reputation times the price multiplier rounded down, meaning that a positive reputation lowers prices but a negative reputation increase them. The price multiplier is either 0.05 or 0.2 depending on the item, see trading. Prices can not get lower than 1 or higher than the item's stack size. The exact function to calculate the price affected by the gossips is y = x - floor((5a + b + c - d - 5e) × p), Where y is the final price, x is the base price, a is the value of major_positive, b is the value of minor_positive, c is the value of trading, d is the value of minor_negative, e is the value of major_negative, and p is the value of PriceMultiplier.
Iron golems that were not built by a player become hostile towards players whose reputation with any nearby villager is -100 or lower. The golem checks all villagers inside a box centered on the golem and extending 10 blocks in every horizontal direction and 8 blocks in both vertical directions.
Players can set villagers on fire using flint and steel or lava without affecting gossips. The same is true for TNT activated by redstone or a dispenser. However, TNT ignited directly by a player (using flint and steel, fire charges or flaming arrows) does generate gossip for damaged or killed villagers, because the TNT's damage is attributed to the player.


=== Picking up items ===
Villagers have eight hidden inventory slots, which start empty whenever the villager is spawned. Villagers do not intentionally seek out items to pick up, but they do collect any bread, carrots, potatoes, wheat, wheat seeds, beetroot, beetroot seeds, torchflower seeds, pitcher pods, and bone meal within range (bone meal can be picked up only by farmer villagers). These are the only items they can pick up, although the player may use the /item replace command to put any item into a villager's inventory. Villagers can fill all 8 inventory slots with the same item. If a player and a villager are in the pickup range of an item at the same time, the player always picks it up first. If several villagers are next to an item, the same one picks up the item every time. Consequently, in constrained space, the same villager picks up any item dropped. This behavior prevents villagers from sharing food in a one-block space.
When killed or converted to a zombie villager, any inventory item of the villager is lost, even when /gamerule keepInventory is set to true.
If /gamerule mobGriefing is false, villagers cannot pick up items, and farmer villagers cannot plant or harvest crops.
Like other mobs, villagers have four slots for worn armor, separate from their inventory. An adjacent dispenser can equip armor, elytra, mob heads, or carved pumpkins to a villager, but the armor is not rendered (except for carved pumpkins and mob heads). The equipment functions as normal; for example, a villager wearing an armor piece enchanted with Thorns can inflict Thorns damage to attackers, and a villager wearing Frost Walker boots is able to create frosted ice. If a villager is converted into a zombie villager, the armor it was wearing is dropped, though it may be able to pick it up and equip it again.


=== Sharing food ===

In Java Edition, villagers collect bread, carrots, potatoes, beetroots, wheat seeds, beetroot seeds, and wheat. If a villager has at least 24 of these items, it gives the extra amount to a villager with 4 or less of each these food items. That other villager can also do this until all villagers have shared all items they could (for example, on a group of three villagers one receives 60 bread, then it shares 36 to another villager to keep 24, and that same villager then shares 12 to the third villager).
In the case of wheat, villagers have a rather distinct behavior. They do the same as other crops, but if a villager has at least 32 wheat, it tries to give half of it to another villager, making both have 16 wheat.
If a villager has 8 full stacks of any kind of food or seeds and then tries to share with another, for example a bait villager in a farm where a hopper picks it all up, it leaves 24 in each stack in its inventory instead of calculating the total amount it has, and it always tries to maintain this minimum amount, thus it can never really empty its inventory down to 0 and clear a slot to pick up other stuff, unless it uses the items when trying to breed or when farming if they are a farmer.
In Bedrock Edition, if a villager has enough food in one inventory stack (6 bread or 24 carrots, potatoes, beetroots, or 18 wheat for farmers only) and sees a villager without enough food in one inventory stack (3 bread, 12 carrots, 12 potatoes, or 12 beetroots for non-farmers; 15 bread, 60 carrots, potatoes, or beetroot, or 45 wheat for farmers), the villager may decide to share food with that villager.
To share, a villager finds its first inventory stack with at least 4 bread, carrots, potatoes, or beetroot or with at least 6 wheat, and then throws half the stack (rounded down) in the direction of the target villager. When wheat is shared, it is first crafted to bread, which may result in 1 or 2 less than half the stack being shared.


=== Farming ===

In Java Edition, during the "work" portion of their schedule farmers tend nearby crops. 

Farmers sometimes move to random farmland blocks they detect within ±4 on the X and Z axes and ±2 on the Y axis, rather than going to their jobsite.
If there are fully-grown crop blocks or air above farmland within ±1 of the villager on each axis, the farmer spends 10 seconds tending them (not counting time spent walking to the next block), one per second. The block is harvested if necessary and (re-)planted if the farmer has any seeds.
If /gamerule mobGriefing is false, villagers cannot farm.
Harvesting is done regardless of the villager's current inventory, even if they lack space to pick up the results.
Planting is done as from the first eligible inventory slot.
If there is at least one non-fully-grown crop block within ±3 of the farmer on each axis, the farmer has bone meal, and it has been at least 8 seconds since the farmer last did some fertilization, then the farmer fertilizes up to four crop blocks (one every two seconds).
When the farmer works at their composter, it composts excess wheat and beetroot seeds, and extracts bone meal if it is full. Up to 20 seeds are composted in one work session, but at least 10 of each type of seed are first kept. Inventory slots are checked in reverse order.
In Bedrock Edition, farmers tend crops within the village boundary. Villagers far enough outside the boundary of any village also tend nearby crops. Farmland to be tended is found by seeking for certain blocks up to 9 blocks away from the villager in the X and Z coordinates and up to 1 away in the Y coordinate (a 19×19×3 volume total).

If a farmer villager does not have enough food in one stack in its inventory (15 bread, 60 carrots, 60 potatoes, 60 beetroots, or 45 wheat) and finds fully-grown wheat, carrots, potatoes, or beetroot, the villager moves to the crop block and harvests it.
If a farmer villager has any seeds, carrots, potatoes, or beetroot seeds in his inventory and finds an air block above farmland, the villager moves to it and plants a crop. They always plant from the first eligible slot in their inventory.
Farmer villagers use and pick up bone meal. They also fill their composter with seeds.
Farmer villagers only start farming if a crop is planted on farmland previously.
Farmer villagers continue to plant on the farmland even if all crops are destroyed.
For both editions,

Farmer villagers can neither turn dirt, grass blocks, or dirt paths into farmland nor pick up any hoes to till the blocks.
If a hoe is placed into a farmer villager's mainhand or offhand via commands, they still cannot till any blocks.
Farmer villagers often share their crops and food with other villagers if they have any extras.


=== Breeding ===

In Java Edition, villagers can only attempt to breed while wandering (see § Schedules below). Note however, villagers may not always follow their schedule; they may for example start § Panicking instead of wandering if frightened, or wander instead of § Gathering if there is no meeting place set in the village. Note however during the night villagers will always search for their beds rather than wandering, thus they cannot breed during the night.  
In Java Edition, wandering villagers may try to breed although there is no guarantee they will as villagers have multiple tasks to choose from while wandering. During a breeding attempt two willing (see § Willingness below) villagers will look at each other and heart particles will appear around each of them. An attempt succeeds if an unclaimed bed can be reached via pathfinding within a 48 block radius of the breeding villagers. If successful, a baby villager will be created, 12 § Food Units from each of the breeding villager's inventories will be consumed, and they must wait a 6000 tick / 5 minute cooldown before attempting to breed again. The appearance of the child is randomly determined by either the biome type of the parents or by the biome where the breeding occurred. When the attempt fails anger particles are displayed, no baby villager is produced, and there is no cooldown before breeding may be attempted again. However, 12 food units are still consumed by each villager. Since villagers can't breed during the night they may produce up to two children a day maximum.  
In Bedrock Edition a census is periodically taken to determine the current population of the village. All villagers within the horizontal boundary of the village are counted as part of the population to determine if continued villager mating is allowed. However, any villager within the horizontal boundary of the village and the spherical boundary of the village attempts to enter mating mode as long as there is at least one villager within the boundary. If two villagers simultaneously enter mating mode while they are close to one another, they breed and produce a child. The appearance is determined by the biome where the breeding occurs in Bedrock Edition. 


==== Food Units ====
During breeding, food is required and consumed from the villager's inventories. Different foods supply different amounts of "food units" to the villager. Carrots, potatoes, and beetroots count for 1 food unit each while bread counts as 4. 


==== Willingness ====
Villagers must be willing to breed. If a villager has 12 units of food in their inventory, they become willing. Breeding consumes the villager's food stock, therefore, after mating, villagers may cease to be willing until they regather a sufficient stock of food items.
Any villager with an excess of food (usually farmers) throws food to other villagers, allowing them to pick it up and obtain enough food to become willing. The player can also throw bread, carrots, beetroots, or potatoes at the villagers themselves to encourage breeding. Villagers consume the required food upon becoming willing. If /gamerule mobGriefing is false, villagers don't pick up food or break crops.


==== Bed Requirements ====
Breeding depends on the number of valid beds. If a villager is "willing" (see § Willingness above), villagers may breed as long as there are unclaimed beds available within the limits of the village. § Baby villagers require beds with at least 2 empty blocks above the head (note that mobs view slabs as full blocks for pathfinding, so putting upper half slabs above a bed invalidates the bed). Job sites, jobs, doors, windows, or roofs are not required for villagers to breed. All baby villagers are initially unemployed. 


=== Baby villagers ===
Baby villagers sprint around, entering and leaving houses at will. They sometimes stop sprinting to stare at other villagers,‌ the player, or an iron golem. If the iron golem is holding out a poppy, the children may cautiously take the flower from its hands. Baby villagers tend to group and chase one another around the village as if playing tag. They also jump on beds.
Illagers ignore baby villagers until they reach adulthood.

Baby villagers give gifts of poppies or wheat seeds to players who have the Hero of the Village effect in Java Edition. 
Baby villagers in Bedrock Edition and Minecraft Education have a slightly bigger head than in Java Edition; this also can be seen in other baby mobs in the game as well. Java Edition baby villagers don't have too big of a head, so they look like a tiny normal villager.
Baby villagers can fit through 1×1 block gaps.
A baby villager becomes an adult 20 minutes after birth, even when in a boat or a minecart. Baby villagers with no AI do not grow up.


=== Lightning ===

When lightning strikes within 3–4 blocks of a villager, the villager is replaced by a witch that can't despawn. Even a baby villager that is struck by lightning is turned into a two-block-tall witch. 
Iron golems also attack any villagers that turned into witches.


=== Iron golem summoning ===

Villagers can summon iron golems to protect themselves from hostile mobs. 
Villagers can summon an iron golem regardless of their profession (including nitwits) or latest working time.
In Bedrock Edition, a golem can spawn if there are at least 20 beds and 10 villagers. All villagers in the village must have a bed, and a profession with access to the profession block. It spawns in a 16×6×16 area around the village center and attempts to spawn once every 700 game ticks, or about every 35 seconds. One golem spawns per 10 villagers. The golem must be killed near the village as villagers have a long cooldown time for golems that wander away. 


=== Panicking ===
Villagers sometimes panic during a raid or a zombie siege by emitting water particles and shaking. During this time, Villagers refuse to sleep until the raid is over.
In Java Edition, villagers panic if they see a mob that is hostile toward villagers, like a zombie, zombie villager, husk, drowned, zoglin, illager, vex, wither, or ravager and flee frantically from them, sometimes hiding in houses. In Bedrock Edition, villagers panic by running around in circles around a bed in a village house, such as when a raid happens or when the player rings the village bell. Java Edition villagers in panic are more likely to summon iron golems. To see these mobs, the villager must have an unobstructed line of sight to it (eye-level to eye-level), and be within a certain range (spherical distance between feet center bottom-most point of the villager and hostile mob):


=== Zombies ===

Zombies, zombie villagers, husks, and drowned seek out and attack villagers within a 35– to 52.5–block radius (depending on regional difficulty)‌ or a 16-block radius‌ (even when the villager is invisible). Zombies attempt to break down doors, but only a fraction of zombies can do so and can succeed only when difficulty is set to hard. Zombies who cannot break doors tend to crowd around a door that separates them from a villager. If a zombie or a drowned comes across a set of doors with one open, it usually tries to go through the closed door.
Both zombies and drowned either kill villagers or convert them to zombie villagers. The chance of the villager becoming a zombie villager upon death is 0% on Easy, 50% on Normal, and 100% on Hard. Baby villagers can be infected by zombies as well. Drowned are able to convert villagers to zombie villagers, even when attacking with a trident from a distance.


=== Raids ===

During a raid, villagers flee from illagers and run to the nearest house, similar to a zombie siege. For a villager to hide, the house must have a door and at least one bed.
Before the first raid wave in Java Edition, at least one villager rushes to ring the bell in the center of the village (if they are close enough) to warn the other villagers of an incoming raid before going into their house. In Bedrock Edition, the bell rings automatically regardless of whether a villager is nearby. In Java Edition, when a bell is rung, all illagers within 48 blocks get the glowing effect for 3 seconds. 
A villager often stays in the house it first entered, but may exit the house occasionally. The player can still trade with villagers during a raid.
On random occasions, the villager displays water particles as if sweating.
In Java Edition, once the player gains the Hero of the Village status after defeating a raid, villagers give them a discount for their trades and throw them gifts related to their profession.
For a list of items that they can gift, see Hero of the Village § Gifts.


=== Staring ===

Villagers stare at any player that stares at them, or goes near them. This also applies for some mobs, especially wolves. A villager first turns its head towards the player, then the body. Villagers can keep staring at the player unless a raid happens or a zombie comes and chases them off. 


== Schedules ==
Villagers have set schedules depending on their age and employment status. Schedules define the villager's goals, which mostly determine how they behave throughout the day. However, their goals can be interrupted by higher priority behaviors most villagers have, such as fleeing from an attack, trading, and getting out of the rain.


=== Working ===
Employed villagers spend most of their day standing next to their job site blocks. From time to time, they "gather supplies" by wandering a short distance away, then returning.
Some professions have additional job-specific goals that are part of their work schedule:

Farmers harvest and sow crops.
Librarians inspect bookshelves.‌
When a villager reaches its job site block, it commences "work". Two times a day, this action of working resupplies any locked trades. Villagers can resupply twice per day, even without having a bed or while sitting in a minecart. A villager can "reach" its job site block if the block is in any of the 8 directly adjacent or diagonal block spaces horizontally around it at the height of their feet, or at the 9 blocks below that. Villagers can still "reach" them diagonally, even if they can't see or touch the face of the block.
Employed villagers do not breed with each other during their work schedule. Nitwits and the unemployed do not follow this rule as they would breed with each other and the employed villagers.
Leatherworker villagers work at any cauldron; the cauldron does not have to be filled with water in order for the villager to work at it.


=== Wandering ===
All villagers wander from time to time, but for the unemployed and nitwits, they wander for the majority of their day. A wandering villager chooses a random block and walks toward it, then stands there for a variable amount of time before wandering again. If at any time it detects a job site block it can claim, it does so, assumes the skin for the associated profession, and immediately begins following the appropriate schedule.
A villager attempts to claim a job site block by finding a path to a block next to one, showing angry particles when unable to reach it. After a villager fails to reach the job site block several times, it becomes unclaimed, indicated by showing angry particles on it. The villager loses its job site block and eventually becomes unemployed if the villager is at novice-level and no nearby job site block is available. Any other nearby unemployed villager has a chance to become the block's new owner. If there are no unemployed villagers nearby, then the villager who lost the job site block seeks for another unclaimed one or tries to reclaim the same unreachable one in an endless loop (this also happens for claiming beds).
The wander schedule includes a job-specific goal called "exploring the outskirts" that causes villagers to wander near the edges of the village. This enables them to detect new beds, job site blocks, bells, and houses that players have used to extend the village. 
During this time of the day, they may also share items.
In Java Edition this is the only time of day villagers are able to breed. As there are multiple tasks villagers may choose to do, there is no guarantee they will breed.


=== Gathering ===
Late in the day, adult villagers gather at a meeting place (the area around a bell). When two villagers encounter one another, they mingle (look at each other and "converse" by humming at other villagers). 
If a villager isn't close enough to detect a bell, it wanders randomly, searching for one.


=== Playing ===

Baby villagers wander randomly around the village. When they encounter another baby villager, the two of them follow each other for a while and sometimes run as if racing or chasing each other. 
In Java Edition, they sometimes stop to jump and bounce on a bed or to stare at an iron golem they encounter. If the iron golem offers them a poppy, the baby villager cautiously accepts it.


=== Returning home ===
All villagers head home a short time before sunset. They roam around until they get near their beds, then target a block beside the bed. Once they reach their beds, they do not go through a door again before sleeping.
A villager who has no bed simply waits inside a house until morning. This includes players stealing a villager's bed to sleep in, mostly the villager stays in the house and doesn't move until sunrise. But sometimes, if they detect a unclaimed bed nearby they walk out of the house and towards the bed.


=== Sleeping ===
 
At sunset, villagers lie down in their beds and remain there until morning. Villagers wake early if food is thrown at them ‌, they are pushed out of bed, or if their bed is destroyed. They also wake up when their bed is used, if they are attacked, or when a bell is rung.
If possible, they return to sleeping in a bed after the interruption. #
Jumping on a bed with a villager sleeping in it doesn't cause the villager to get up. 
In Java Edition, villagers can be pushed on beds and sometimes turn their heads. A villager can be pushed off a bed, but most likely to go back to sleeping after staring at the player who pushed the villager for a few seconds. 
When sleeping in Bedrock Edition, a villager's hitbox reduces to a cube restricted to the pillow part of the bed. If an anvil is dropped on the hitbox, the villager takes damage and wakes up. 
In Java Edition, dropping any anvil on a villager that is sleeping causes the anvil to bounce and drop as an item, and the villager remains sleeping and does not take damage. 
A villager who has no bed continues wandering in search of a bed to claim.
Villagers follow their Overworld schedules regardless of which dimension they are in. They can sleep in the Nether or the End, without causing the usual consequences of the bed exploding (See Bed), if the Overworld's time is correct. This is because the daylight cycle continues in these dimensions, even though it is not normally apparent to the player.
Sometimes when a villager gets in a bed from another direction they turn their body until their head is on the pillow of the bed. Villagers also sleep with their eyes open, just like players.


=== Healing ===
Villagers get a brief regeneration effect once leveling up in their profession. Pink regeneration particles appear when the villager is healing. 
In Bedrock Edition, when villagers successfully sleep, they immediately heal themselves when waking up at dawn if they are damaged.


== Professions ==

Each villager can have a profession except for the nitwit, indicated by their clothing as well as by the title at the top of the trading interface. A villager can choose their profession by claiming a job site block. When they go to work, they use their daily schedule to get to their claimed job site block. Some professions, like farmers and librarians, do other things. Farmers plant crops, and librarians can inspect bookshelves. If an adult villager does not have a profession (either they are unemployed or a nitwit), they wander instead.
A job site block can be claimed only if it is unclaimed and within a village boundary with at least 1 bed. Removal of a claimed job site block causes the owner to switch to another profession or become unemployed, provided that the villager has no prior trades with the player. If the villager has prior trades, it keeps its profession and claims a new job site block that matches its profession if one is available. So, once a player trades with a villager, the villager keeps its profession forever.
Nitwits and baby villagers cannot change their profession.
In Java Edition, villagers summoned by a spawn egg or via command /summon are always unemployed until they have claimed a job site block. In Bedrock Edition, however, villagers summoned in similar ways have a random profession; their profession can be changed by a job site block, though.
Novice-level villagers who have not yet traded can lose their profession and change into unemployed villagers.
Unemployed adults actively seek for an unclaimed job site block and change into the corresponding profession.
Below is a table listing the various professions, along with the specific job site block that each profession requires:


=== Nitwit ===

Nitwit villagers wear robes that are green on top. They cannot acquire a profession, trade, or gather around bells, but are still able to breed. They are not equipped with a level stone since they cannot trade. Pressing use on a nitwit in Java Edition causes it to grunt and bobble its head at the player. A nitwit must be born or spawned; no villagers change to nitwit from unemployed or a profession, and vice versa. Nitwits can be found naturally or by curing naturally spawned zombie villagers. Zombie villagers can also be spawned as babies, so this is the only way to encounter baby nitwits in survival mode. In Bedrock Edition, every baby villager has a 10% chance to become a nitwit when they become an adult, as well as having a different sleep schedule where they wander around the village for about 2000 ticks after other villagers go to sleep, before seeking a bed. If they can claim a bed, they arise in the morning 2000 ticks (1 minute 40 seconds) after the rest of the village wakes up. 


=== Appearance ===
Villagers and zombie villagers have seven skin types corresponding to the biome they spawn in. Their appearance also varies based on their profession and their five tiers. They show which trade tier they have unlocked by a badge of a varying material on their belt. A new tier is obtained every time a player trades with a villager and the badge appears as stone, iron, gold, emerald, and finally diamond.
Villagers have different outfits depending on their biome. Naturally generated villagers take on the outfit from the biome they were spawned in. When breeding occurs, the outfit of the child is determined by the biome where the breeding occurs, but in Java Edition, there is a 50% chance it's inherited from the biome type of the parents (equal chance for both parents). In case the villager's outfit is determined by biome but the biome has no specific villager type, it always becomes a plains villager. The outfits available are:

Notes

Villagers have 13 professions and 2 non professions for a total of 15 outfits: 

Farmer (straw hat)
Trades crops and natural foods, such as bread and cookies.
Fisherman (fisher hat)
Trades campfires and fishing items.
Shepherd (brown hat with white apron)
Trades shears, wool, dyes, paintings, and beds.
Fletcher (hat with feather and quiver on the back)
Trades bows, crossbows, all types of arrows (except luck), and archery ingredients.
Cleric (purple apron and creeper cloak)
Trades magic items like ender pearls, redstone dust, glowstone dust, and other enchanting or potion ingredients.
Weaponsmith (eyepatch and black apron)
Trades minerals, bells, and enchanted melee weapons. The axe enchantments are weapon related, such as sharpness or smite.
Armorer (welding mask)
Trades foundry items and sells chain, iron, and enchanted diamond armor tiers.
Toolsmith (black apron)
Trades minerals, bells, and harvest tools. The axe enchantments are tool related.
Librarian (eyeglasses and a book as a hat)
Trades enchanted books, clocks, compasses, name tags, glass, ink sacs, lanterns, and book and quills.
Cartographer (golden monocle)
Trades banners, compasses, banner patterns, papers, and various maps, including explorer maps.
Leatherworker (brown apron and brown gloves)
Trades scutes, rabbit hide, and leather-related items.
Butcher (red headband and white apron)
Trades meats, sweet berries, rabbit stew, and dried kelp blocks.
Mason‌/Stone Mason‌ (black apron and black gloves)
Trades polished stones, terracotta, clay, glazed terracotta, and quartz.
Nitwit (green coated, no badge)
No trades, no badge
Unemployed (no overlay, base clothing of biome without any extra features)
No trades until employed. No badge until employed.


== Trading ==

The trading system is a gameplay mechanic that allows players to buy and sell various items to and from villagers, using emeralds as a currency. Their trades can be valuable or somewhat meaningless, depending on the cost, the items the player might get, and how the player treats the villagers. Only adult villagers with professions can trade; the player cannot trade with nitwits, unemployed villagers, or baby villagers. Attempting to do so causes the villager to display a head-bobbling animation and play the villager's declined trade sound‌.
Using an employed villager allows a player to trade, making offers based on the villager's profession and profession level. All offers involve emeralds as a currency, and items related to the villager's profession. Trading can allow the acquisition of items that would otherwise be difficult or impossible to obtain, such as enchanted books with "treasure" enchantments (e.g. Mending), bottles o' enchanting, or chainmail armor. When a villager gets a new trade, they receive 10 seconds of Regeneration I (totaling to 4 of restoration), which emits pink particles. The villager also emits green particles suggesting contentment.
Completing a trade with a villager increases its professional level. Some trades grant higher levels to the villager than others. As it advances through its profession, the villager offers additional trades. When a villager unlocks a new trade at a higher level, it almost always grants more experience than lower-level trades.
Villagers have a maximum supply of items and after the player has traded for an item that many times, the villager's supply of the item is exhausted. This results in the trade being temporarily locked. A player can continue to trade for the villager's other available items if any. Exhausted items are restocked when the villager works at a job site, up to twice per day.
In Bedrock Edition, librarian villagers have a 50% chance to sell enchanted books as part of their trades at novice, apprentice, and journeyman-level, and have 1⁄3 chance to sell enchanted books at expert-level as part of their trades, meaning each librarian villager can sell up to four books. The price ranges between 5-64 emeralds per book. Based on the level of the enchantment and whether it is classified as a "treasure enchantment" (meaning they are not obtainable by enchanting, e.g. Mending), which doubles the cost, or not a price is determined.

In Java Edition, librarian villagers have a 2⁄3 chance to sell an enchanted book as part of their trades at the novice, apprentice, and journeyman level, and have a 50% chance to sell an enchanted book at the expert level, meaning each librarian can sell up to four books. The price ranges from 5-64 emeralds per book, depending on the enchantment's level as well as whether or not it is a treasure enchantment.

They may contain any available enchantment (except Soul Speed and Swift Sneak) at any available level. See trading notes for more information on enchantments and prices.

Clicking use on an unemployed or nitwit villager in Java Edition causes it to grunt and bobble their head; doing so in Bedrock Edition does nothing.
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
Using a name tag on a villager always names the villager instead of opening the trading interface.


=== Supply and demand ===

The price of an item can rise and fall with changes in demand. The price of a traded item can rise when next resupplied, or fall from a risen price if not traded. Demand is stored per item, not per villager.


=== Trade offering ===

When a player holds an item near a villager who wants that item, the villager holds up an item it offers in exchange. For example, a farmer villager who buys 20 wheat for one emerald holds up an emerald, offering it to a player holding wheat. Villagers do not offer trades that are currently out of stock. If the villager has more than one trade for an item, it cycles through the trades, offering a different item every few seconds. This kind of trading interaction makes it easier to find villagers who offer a particular trade, but the player must still open the trading interface to complete the trade. Note that villagers do not hold items to offer trades during their gather or sleep phases, even though it is still possible to trade with them.


=== Economic trade ===
Villagers have levels and require experience to unlock the next tiers of trade: level 1 is a novice, level 2 is apprentice, level 3 is journeyman, level 4 is expert, and level 5 is master. Villagers can resupply trades by themselves by working more at their job site block.


=== Popularity or reputation ===
In Bedrock Edition, villagers increase their prices of trades if a player's popularity is low, (e.g. from damaging villagers), and decrease it if their popularity is high (e.g. from trading with multiple villagers). Curing a zombie villager also increases the player's popularity by 10.
In Java Edition, a villager's prices are affected by the player's reputation with that villager rather than by village popularity.


=== Hero of the Village ===

When a player receives Hero of the Village, players receive discounted prices on all the items traded by villagers in both editions. The Hero of the Village also gets gifts.‌ Each villager throws gifts related to its profession, and nitwits and unemployed villagers throw wheat seeds instead. These gifts range in value from common (like seeds) to rare items (like chainmail armor). A player's popularity increases by 10 in Java Edition and doesn't increase in Bedrock Edition. Villagers also shoot off fireworks, with different colored fireworks with no pattern.


== Similar mobs ==


=== Zombie villagers ===

When a zombie kills a villager, it can turn the villager into a zombie villager, depending on the difficulty: 0% chance on Easy, 50% chance on Normal, and 100% chance on Hard. Zombie villagers also spawn naturally in the Overworld in the same conditions as a normal zombie, although much less commonly, with a 5% chance. Zombie villagers also spawn in abandoned villages (zombie villages) and igloos. They do not spawn from the zombie monster spawner.


=== Wandering trader ===

Wandering traders are passive mobs that spawn randomly close to the player in both editions, or periodically in village gathering sites in Bedrock Edition. Wandering traders also spawn near bells. Two trader llamas spawn leashed to the wandering trader when a wandering trader is naturally spawned, and in Bedrock Edition when summoned or spawned using a spawn egg.
Players may use emeralds to buy items from wandering traders without the need of unlocking the previous trade, but cannot trade items for emeralds. They also lock trades like villagers, but never unlock the trade, nor can they work at any job site blocks. Like villagers, wandering traders are attacked by most zombie variants (though they do not have a zombified form, they die if a zombie kills it, even on hard difficulty), illagers, ravagers‌, and vexes. 
Wandering traders also drink a Potion of Invisibility at night (or when they see a hostile mob such as an illager or zombie). They also drink a milk bucket in the morning to remove the Invisibility. They despawn after 40 minutes (even with a name tag or in a minecart or boat) with their llamas.


== Sounds ==


=== Generic ===
Java Edition:
Villagers use the Friendly Creatures sound category for entity-dependent sound events.

Bedrock Edition:


=== Working ===
Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:


== Data values ==


=== ID ===
Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:


=== Entity data ===
Villagers have entity data associated with them that contains various properties.
Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition: 

See Bedrock Edition level format/Entity format.


== Achievements ==


== Advancements ==


== Video ==


== History ==


== Issues ==
Issues relating to "Villager" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.


== Trivia ==
The villagers were inspired by the shopkeepers in Dungeon Master II.
Originally, the mobs populating villages were to be pigmen.
When a villager is in love mode, it walks slowly. However, when a villager runs indoors as the night falls, it runs faster than the player's sprinting speed.
Baby villagers taking poppies out of Iron Golem's hands is a reference to the 1986 Japanese animated movie Castle in the Sky, in which a giant robot covered in vines (inspiration for the iron golem) gives the main characters flowers to put on a memorial.
The villager skins added in the Village and Pillage update were inspired by 2018 fashion shows, such as Gucci's.
Villagers are genderless, meaning they are neither male nor female.
Villagers occasionally sleep in odd ways during the night inside their beds, sometimes hanging halfway off the side of the bed or even glitching into walls.
Although the villages in snowy taiga biomes spawn the snowy villager variant in Bedrock Edition, they use the taiga village variant.
In Java Edition, when the Programmer Art resource pack is enabled, all villagers wear a green hood on their heads. This is because the Programmer Art nitwit texture (which is directly copied from the pre-1.14 vanilla resource pack and had the hood in the texture since its addition) is called the same as the Village & Pillage base villager texture (...\entity\villager\villager.png).
In Bedrock Edition, when the Classic Textures pack from the Marketplace is enabled, the villagers still use their default texture instead of the old texture. This is because the old textures of villager are located in ...\entity\villager, while the textures for new villagers are in ...\entity\villager2.
In Java Edition, baby villagers are the only mobs that do not have a disproportionately large head compared to their adult counterparts. Rather, they are smaller versions of the adult villager.
Giving a villager any item (with commands) causes it to hold the item as if offering it, but it cannot be traded.
Fisherman villagers have been intentionally textured by Jasper Boerstra to display the long-since-removed raw fish texture.
Villagers display their held items differently than most creatures do, using the "ground" parameter instead of the usual hand parameter in model display settings.
Villagers (and baby villagers) on boats that have claimed a bed can still sleep when the bed is near to them resulting in them sleeping in the boat instead.‌
Ancient villagers have been shown in Minecraft Legends, although they were hinted at in Minecraft Dungeons.
In Java Edition, the death messages of villagers are recorded in the game's logs.
Cleric villagers have a pattern on the back of their coat reminiscent of a Creeper's face.
In Bedrock Edition, when a villager offers a piece of armor as a trade, it makes said armor piece's tier's corresponding equipment sound.
In the new Lava Chicken music disc, a villager is heard singing in most of the segments.


=== April fools ===

                                                                           
On April 1, 2014, Mojang announced that villagers have taken over the skin servers and content delivery networks (CDN) as an April Fools joke. This caused the player's current skin to turn into villager skins, and caused users to be unable to change their skins unless modifying the launcher.json file. Different career villager skins were used, including the then-unused nitwit villager (green robe).
Many of the sounds were also changed, supposedly by the villagers. They seem to be similar to a villager talking (with words, rather than their normal sounds). The in-game music has also been altered to include villager like noises, and also features a villager version of the "Game of Thrones" theme on the title screen. The sounds originate from the sound resource pack created by Element Animation, titled The Element Animation Villager Sound Resource Pack (T.E.A.V.S.R.P.), which is based on the villagers appearing in their fan videos. The villagers were voiced by Dan Lloyd, Director of Element Animation.
The skins and the sounds were reverted to the way they were before on April 2, 2014. However, this update cannot be activated by setting the computer's date to April 1, 2014.


== Gallery ==


=== Renders ===

		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


=== Renders asleep ===

		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


=== Screenshots ===

		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


=== Animations ===

		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


=== Artwork ===

		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


=== In other media ===

		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


== References ==