An evoker is a powerful illager that can be found within the various missions of Minecraft Dungeons. When spawned, a music soundtrack plays. In the arcade edition, it's considered a normal mob.

In the introduction, Walda is seen crowning the Arch-Illager as the ruler of the Illagers. As the Arch-Illager gets up from his throne, all the illagers except Walda bow, causing the Arch-Illager to hit Walda over the head with the Orb of Dominance to force Walda to bow down to him.

In the prequel novel about Archie's origin, the names of two evokers were confirmed to be:

Walda  A female evoker, was the leader of the Woodland Mansion where Archie lived. At the end, she puts the crown on the Arch-Illager's head and bows down to him.
Thord  Archie's former childhood bully. After "Smacker" obliterates the entire raid patrol, Thord and Archie are the sole survivors. Despite having told Archie to stay out of the fight, Thord blames him for not helping, and reports the incident as such to Walda, causing Archie to be exiled. Eventually, after becoming the Arch-Illager, Archie uses two redstone golems to force Thord to burn within lava.

An unnamed evoker was featured as the protagonist of Baby Ghast Presents:The Illagers New Robes, a story that the baby ghast told within a Twitter post revolving around the unnamed evoker creating the baby ghast-fit robe.

Evokers have an appearance that is similar to how its counterpart within the original game appears. Yet, evokers in Minecraft Dungeons are slightly bigger than other illagers just like the other powerful mobs. 
The last two rows of pixels on evoker's robe cannot be render in Minecraft Dungeons. 

Creeper Woods (Adventure)
Woodland Mansion
Woodland Prison
Soggy Swamp (Apocalypse) (Boss in arcade)
Pumpkin Pastures
Spider Cave
Redstone Mines
Fiery Forge (Adventure)
Desert Temple (Adventure; Ancient Hunts as a non-boss)
Lower Temple (Adventure)
Highblock Halls
Obsidian Pinnacle
Obsidian Pinnacle (Arcade as a non-boss)
Windswept Peaks
Gale Sanctum
Gauntlet of Gales
Colossal Rampart
End Wilds (Adventure)
Broken Citadel (Adventure)
Daily Trial
Ancient Hunt
Tower

Walk
While not attacking, they attempt to stay at a certain distance from the hero.
Evokers have three attack behaviors:

Basic attack
Evokers raise their hands, which envelope a purple aura, and summon three vexes within a circle.

Strong attack
Evokers raise their hands, which envelope a yellow aura, before bringing them down, summoning a stream of fangs out of the ground to hurt approaching heroes. Evoker fangs are non-attackable mobs that appear either as a line of seven fangs from evokers towards targets, or as a circle of twelve fangs around evokers.

Combo attack
Evokers can summon both vexes and evoker fangs in seconds, similar to an evoker within the original game.  

Novelty
A rare dancing behavior when evokers idle, which is one of the easter eggs in the game.

An evoker fang is a non-attackable mob that can be summoned by evokers within the various missions of Minecraft Dungeons. They snap up from the ground and quickly disappear.

A vex is a mob that can be summoned by evokers within the various missions of Minecraft Dungeons.

Vexes appear almost the same as they used to within the original game, with the only difference being that it is more luminescent and glowing, as well as having darker colored cracks on its skin and shorter wings. Another key difference is that when attacking, the cracks now appear as a flaming orange rather than dark blue.

There is no limit to how many Vexes may follow the hero at once. Vexes are also the only other entity that can roll, besides dead mobs and redstone cubes. They can only roll while attacking or idle.

Strong attack
Vexes attack like any normal mob, unable to go through blocks, unlike the original game.

 The seeking flame is an ancient vex that can be encountered during ancient hunts with the minimum offering of the following runes:

The ancient resides within a Desert Temple-themed arena and possesses, at minimum, the following enchantments:

Burning
Fire Aspect
Fire Trail
Huge
Three enchanted evokers act as the ancient's minions, possessing the following enchantments:

Chilling
Upon defeating the seeking flame, a gilded variant of the following items drops as a reward:

Axe
Firebrand
Highland Axe
Evocation Robe
Ember Robe
Verdant Robe
Soul Knife
Eternal Knife
Truthseeker

In the game files, evokers are referred to internally by the names Evoker and IllagerEvoker.
In the game files, evoker fangs are referred to internally by the name Fang.

Issues relating to "Evoker" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

The animation files and textures of evokers are perfectly compatible with the skeleton mesh model of illusioners. The difference between the two models is only one more hood layer. If the texture of evokers is imported into the model of illusioners, the hood layer will be replaced by the white wig of evokers.
Evoker and illusioner's "Get Hit Front" animations are the same.
There is a "wololoo" sound heard within the boss fight theme of evokers. This is the sound that they make within the original game when turning a blue sheep red. The sound itself is a reference to another Microsoft franchise, Age of Empires, where the priest unit can turn enemy units into friendly units (changing the unit's color in the process) after making a "wololoo" sound.
When an evoker is defeated, there is a new ghost screaming sound that can be heard within the background along with its death sounds. This screaming sound can also be heard within some areas of missions such as the graveyard within the creeper woods.
When an evoker is enchanted by an enchanter, its HP increases by only 25%.
It's possible to stun evoker fangs, which causes them to simply stay harmless in place. This can be done with the snowball enchantment.
The description of battle robes state that evokers are the ones that made it. Within the redstone mines and the colossal rampart, evokers can rarely drop their battle robe when defeated.
Evokers raise their eyebrows when summoning evoker fangs, and closes their eyes when summoning vexes.