Thord is an evoker who used to be Archie's bully until Archie stumbled upon the Orb of Dominance which granted him immense power. He appears in The Rise Of The Arch-Illager .

After the lost battle, Archie pushed himself back to his feet, surveying the fallen Illagers. Somebody then smacks Archie on the back of his head. Turning himself around, Archie thinks that Karl decided to kill him off, but is instead shocked when that somebody is revealed to be Thord, an evoker who had bullied Archie since his childhood. Thord had somehow survived Karls attack and was wobbling around. He asks Archie for a sword, who finds one nearby and gives it to him. Thord then grabs the sword by the hilt and stabs it in the ground, using it as a crutch. Thord then surveys the battlefield, giving off a frown, and says to Archie that hell pay for letting the other Illagers die. Archie then says that he wasnt responsible, but Thord says that he is responsible. Archie tries to make another argument, but thoughts from his past creep into his head, such as how Thord and the other Illagers had said to him repeatedly that he was weak and couldnt make a difference in anything. Cringing in fear, Archie says that hes worthless and didnt want to be a part of the Illagers in the first place. Thord agrees, saying that Archie wouldve let Karl kill the entire tribe of Illagers. The two then begin heading back toward their woodland mansion, with Archie attempting to talk with Thord about how they should fight heroes differently. Thord responds by smacking Archie on the head with the sword, making Archie feel even more terrified. 
Thord and Archie eventually arrive at the woodland mansion, where they are greeted by the other Illagers. Somehow, Archie has an idea, running past Thord and greeting Walda, the leader of the Illagers. Archie then explains to Walda that the hero had stole the victory from the Illagers, putting the blame on Thord by saying that it was him that thought he could take on a hero all by himself. The other Illagers gasp in response. Archie then asks Walda if she had appointed Thord herself, in which she replies that she did. She then says that the Illagers still havent learned the lesson from the last time they died, saying that they still charge into battle without thinking about other dangers. Thord and Archie then have an argument about who was in charge of their particular group, specifically as to who was at fault for the death of the raiding party. Archie then punches Thord, who drops to the ground, clutching his injured leg. Archie yells at him to get up, kicking him in the thigh. Walda then says to Archie that because of his actions, he would be banished from the group of Illagers, seemingly forever.