An illusioner is a powerful illager that can be found within the various missions of Minecraft Dungeons.

Illusioners are illagers that look very different from illusioners within the original game. Instead of a blue cloak, illusioner wear a dark purple cloak, dark boots, and a hood with dark outlines on the edges. Under the cloak is leather clothing, with a leather bag, belt, and iron buckle. Illusioners also have pink eyes, which are brighter than the eyes of other illagers.

Frosted Fjord
Lone Fortress
Lost Settlement
Windswept Peaks
Gale Sanctum
Gauntlet of Gales
Colossal Rampart
End Wilds (Adventure)
Broken Citadel (Adventure)
Daily Trial
Tower

Illusioners have four different behaviors.

Summon blind

Illusioners cast ten seconds of blindness on the hero. While blinded, attacks will have a 50% chance to miss and they will emit a black mist over their head.

Bow action

Real illusioners shoot blue with black stripe explosive arrows that are similar to the fireworks arrow which deal much more damage then the arrows shot by the duplicates.

Teleport

Real illusioners use a random attack after teleporting, before teleporting again to create more clones. 

Illusion

Illusioners will turn into a white particle, and then split into several pieces and spread to the surroundings. These particles are mixed with the real illusioner. After a few seconds, the particles will transform back into the real illusioner or its clones to surround the hero.

An illusioner clone is an illusion that can be found within the various missions of Minecraft Dungeons.

Illusioner clones share the same render as illusioners and turn into a purple smoke upon defeat.

Illusioner clones can be defeated separately, unlike the original game. If there is no hero nearby when this ability is used, illusioners and their clones will not appear until a hero gets close. When real illusioners are attacked or when a certain amount of time passes, all of the clones will disappear and new ones will appear shortly after.

Bow action clone

Illusioner clones constantly fire arrows at the hero, dealing a small amount of damage upon impact.

The arrow looks like a regular arrow with a blue-black cone as the tip. They act much like firework arrows and explode on impact. The cone has a medium-blue stripe near the base. Only the original Illusioners can fire these arrows, while the clones fire normal arrows.

Illusioners use the evoker boss soundtrack.

In the game files, illusioners are referred to internally by the name Illusioner or illusionistJasper.
In the game files, illusioner clone arrows are referred to Internally by the name Illusioner_Arrow.

A real illusioner holds a bow within their left hand, while their clones hold bows within their right hand.
Illusioners and illusioner clones sometime have different sounds. A real illusioner's defeat sound is distorted and slowed.
When a real illusioner is defeated, the music stops and plays a ghost screaming with death sounds, which resembles an evoker's defeat scream, but at a much higher pitch.
The animation files and textures of evokers and vindicators are perfectly compatible with the skeleton mesh model of illusioners..

Issues relating to "Illusioner", "Illusionist", "Illusion Illager", or "Illusioner Clone." are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.